Title: Interpreting Neural Combinatorial Optimization via Evolving Programmatic Bottlenecks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19741v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:24:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 39

Markdown Content:
# Interpreting Neural Combinatorial Optimization via Evolving Programmatic Bottlenecks 

Haocheng Duan 1,∗

, Yuxin Guo 1,∗

, Jieyi Bi 2, Anqi Xie 1,Sirui Li 3,†, Yining Ma 4,‡, Cathy Wu 41Carnegie Mellon University 

> 2

Nanyang Technological University 

> 3

Microsoft Research 

> 4

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

## Abstract 

Neural Combinatorial Optimization (NCO) achieves strong performance, yet its black-box nature remains a key roadblock to deployment and scientific diagnosis. Standard interpretability tools, such as Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs), are ill-equipped for NCO, whose decisions are dynamic, state-dependent, and lack proper concept vocabulary definition. To close this gap, we introduce Evolving Programmatic Bottlenecks (EPB), to our knowledge, the first framework for inter-preting NCO policies by distilling black-box NCO models into human-readable program portfolios. EPB employs an LLM to autonomously evolve a bank of pro-grams, where each program’s per-step action distribution serves as the bottleneck. EPB works through an iterative framework: Block I fixes program bank capacity and introduces a hybrid textual-numerical gradient descent scheme that couples numerical gradients for student router updates and textual gradients for LLM-based program revision; Block II dynamically adapts bank capacity via fault-targeted expansion and redundancy pruning. Extensive experiments demonstrate EPB’s effectiveness and broad applicability, where the distilled program portfolios largely match original performance. EPB also reveals that NCO behavior shifts across optimization stages and can be approximated as a composition of classic heuristic variants. Our work advances interpretable NCO and establishes EPB as a promising tool for interpreting sequential decision-making models. 

## 1 Introduction 

Neural Combinatorial Optimization (NCO) has achieved remarkable success, with learned policies now matching the solution quality of strong classical heuristics in complex routing and scheduling [ 1– 3]. However, this success hides a critical interpretability deficit. Current NCO frameworks function as black boxes, providing no insight into what operational strategies have been learned, how these strategies evolve across decision stages, or why a particular action is favored. Because optimization systems directly shape decisions, this lack of transparency weakens the reliability needed for informed and trustworthy industrial deployment. Across the broader AI community, interpretability is increasingly recognized not only for trustworthi-ness but also as a catalyst for research: from feature visualization that informed CNN architectural improvements [ 4], to more recently, the Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [ 5] that enable model 

> ∗Equal contribution.
> †Work done outside the author’s employment.
> ‡Corresponding author: Yining Ma (yiningma@mit.edu). Preprint.
> arXiv:2606.19741v1 [cs.AI] 18 Jun 2026

correction [ 6 ] and improved generalization [ 7]. The core principle is to ground the model behavior into human-readable concepts , turning internal computation into something users understand. A natural question is whether NCO can be interpreted via such an analogous conceptual bridge. However, realizing this analogy is challenging, and no such work exists to our knowledge. While classical operations research (OR) provides numerous algorithmic concepts, such as nearest neighbor 

for the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), they do not directly serve as drop-in CBM concepts. First, an object mismatch exists: standard CBM concepts are typically atomic decision primitives (e.g., colors, textures, or distinct parts for vision tasks), yet an OR concept is a complete decision algorithm. Second, a setting mismatch occurs: standard CBMs often assume a static mapping with a fixed concept set, whereas NCO dictates a sequential trajectory where governing strategies dynamically shift (e.g., across different stages of search and constraint handling). Moreover, constructing an all-encompassing vocabulary for optimization is practically intractable. The underlying algorithmic concept space is combinatorial, spanning countless permutations of decision rules and hyperparameters. These mismatches necessitate a fundamental paradigm shift. Rather than forcing the model to align with a fixed, predefined vocabulary, we abandon the assumption of an a priori concept set in CBMs in favor of dynamically generated program-based concepts. We instantiate this idea as Evolving Programmatic Bottlenecks (EPB) , to our knowledge, the first framework for interpreting NCO policies by distilling them into human-readable program portfolios. EPB lies at the intersection of NCO, concept-based interpretability, policy distillation, and Large Language Models (LLMs)-guided algorithm discovery (see a detailed discussion in §A). It leverages LLMs to autonomously discover and evolve a bank of executable programs as the programmatic concepts which serve as distilled surrogates of the teacher’s behavior. To seamlessly align with the sequential decision-making nature of NCO solvers, these learned programs are dynamically invoked via a state-dependent student router, allowing the overarching strategy to fluidly adapt at each sequential decision-making step. Realizing this paradigm requires answering three coupled questions: (1) which programs populate the bank, (2) how the model composes them across states, and (3) how large the bank should be. Because these questions span incompatible search spaces, including symbolic programs and continuous neural weights (for routing of different programs), monolithic optimization is intractable. Consequently, EPB addresses this by employing an alternating dual-block scheme under a distillation loss: Block I 

performs fixed-capacity hybrid textual-numerical gradient descent, coupling LLM-driven symbolic revision and numerical gradient updates of the routing network; Block II adapts bank capacity through a dual mechanism: spawning specialists to resolve residual failure modes (fault-targeted Add), and pruning redundant heuristics to eliminate overlap (redundancy-targeted Drop). To validate this two-block evolving framework, we apply EPB on POMO [ 2 ] and LEHD [ 3] across TSP and CVRP, yielding interpretable program portfolios that remain close to the teachers and reveal several interpretable insights: (i) On TSP, it uncovers a previously unarticulated distinction: the POMO-distilled surrogate emphasizes phase-based logic, whereas the LEHD-distilled surrogate emphasizes geometric strategies; (ii) On CVRP, we trace the model’s evolving decision strategy, shifting from sector partitioning to capacity-aware selection and greedy returns as construction progresses; (iii) In out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios, our distilled student surrogates substantially outperform the original model in generalizing to large-scale instances, suggesting that explicit programmatic distillation isolates transferable decision patterns while filtering out overfitted noises. 

Contributions: (i) we introduce EPB, the first CBM-style interpretability paradigm for sequential decision policies, where concepts are executable programs generated by LLMs; (ii) We propose a iterative optimization framework that alternates between hybrid gradient descent block, which jointly handles the continuous and symbolic optimization spaces, and the dynamic bank capacity management block; (iii) we provide the per-step and strategy-level interpretations of black-box NCO solvers, exposing their decision logic, stage-wise behaviors, and generalizable patterns; and (iv) we provide evidence that an interpretable programmatic bottleneck can improve a black-box teacher’s OOD generalization, recasting interpretability as a catalyst for research beyond trustworthiness. 

## 2 Preliminaries 

Neural Combinatorial Optimization. A combinatorial optimization (CO) problem defines, for each instance s ∼ D , a feasible set Y(s) and an objective J(y; s) over solutions y = {a1: T }, with the goal of finding y∗(s) ∈ arg min y∈Y (s) J(y; s). We focus on routing problems, specifically 2the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP), where solutions are constructed through sequential decisions (details in §B). NCO models typically employ encoder-decoder architectures to define an autoregressive policy πθ (at | s, a 1: t−1), constructing solutions by sequentially selecting nodes until all vertices are visited and a feasible solution is formed. As representative teachers, we evaluate POMO [ 2 ], which leverages routing symmetries via multi-start rollouts, and LEHD [ 3], a light-encoder/heavy-decoder model trained on partial solutions for robust large-scale generalization (details in §C). Our EPB aims to characterize these black-box policies by identifying the underlying decision rules that drive πθ at each construction step. 

Concept Bottleneck Models. Standard deep learning functions as "black boxes," mapping input 

x directly to output y. Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [ 5] instead factorize the prediction into a two-stage pipeline, y = f (g(x)) , where an encoder g first maps the input to a set of human-interpretable semantic concepts before a predictor f makes the final decision based solely on these attributes. This architecture ensures transparency by grounding the model’s reasoning in a predefined vocabulary; however, it remains largely restricted for NCO, as we discussed in §1. Our EPB follows the same principle, but extends it to sequential decision policies, where the heuristic bank defines concept space, and the state-dependent student router plays the role of f as in §3. 

## 3 Methodology 

A decision policy is a state-conditional distribution over actions, so its natural explanatory unit is not a static concept but a state-dependent decision rule: an executable program mapping the current state to an action space. Our student policy therefore passes through a set of programmatic bottlenecks : a small bank of executable, and human-understandable heuristics, each consisting of a code strategy cm and a natural-language description dm, whose outputs are composed to approximate the teacher. We instantiate this as a student πS (· | s; θ, B) with two components: a heuristic bank 

B = {(cm, d m)}Mm=1 , and a routing network with parameters θ that selects which heuristics drive predictions per state. Training minimizes the discrepancy between πS and the teacher πT (§3.1). The bottleneck cannot be fully specified a priori. Three quantities must be recovered during training: the executable strategies, their state-dependent coefficients, and the bank capacity. At fixed capacity, 

Hybrid Textual-Numerical Gradient Descent (§3.3) jointly updates code strategies cm as textual variables via TextGrad [ 8] and routing parameters θ as numerical variables via SGD, under a shared distillation objective. The bank size M itself is adapted through Add and Drop operations that introduce specialists for uncovered failure modes and prune redundant heuristics (§3.4). 

3.1 Evolving Programmatic Bottlenecks 

At each decision state s, the student πS (· | s; θ, B) computes its prediction via a three-step forward pass (Fig. 1): (1) each heuristic in B evaluates the state to yield a per-action distribution Vm(s)

(Eq. 2); (2) a routing network dynamically computes state-conditional weights wm(s; θ, V ) across the bank (Eq. 3 and Eq. 4); and (3) these components are aggregated into a final prediction using the weighted mixture P 

> m

wm(s) Vm(s) (Eq. 5). 

The heuristic bank. The bank collects M entries, where cm is an executable program that maps the decision state to per-action logits and dm is a few-sentence description of the strategy cm implements: 

B =  (cm, d m) : m = 1 , . . . , M (1) The two components are kept aligned: dm specifies the strategy and guides revisions of cm (§D), while cm provides the executable realization used in the forward computation to produce action probabilities. The bank capacity M evolves during training through Add and Drop operations (§3.4). 

Per-heuristic distributions. Each entry of the heuristic bank produces a per-heuristic distribution over actions by executing its code on the current state and applying a softmax with temperature τh:

Vm(s) = softmax( cm(s)/τ h ) ∈ ∆( A(s)) , (2) where ∆( A(s)) denotes the set of probability distributions over the action set A(s).

Output-Conditioned Dynamic Routing (OCDR) We employ a scaled-dot-product attention module, parameterized by θ, as the router model: at each decision state, it produces a probability distribution 3Figure 1: Overview of our Evolving Programmatic Bottlenecks framework. 

w(s; θ, sg( V )) ∈ ∆( {1, . . . , M }) over the bank’s entries. The final routing weights wm specify the share of heuristic m in the mixture forward pass, computed by the standard attention softmax (Eq. 5). 

wm (s; θ, sg ( V )) = softmax  

> m

(Q (s; θ) · Km (s; θ, sg ( Vm)) / τ r ) , (3) with a softmax temperature τr . Here sg( ·) denotes the stop-gradient operator. It preserves the forward values so the attention weights remain conditioned on Vm(s), but modifies the backward graph to prevent gradient propagating to Vm. This makes the attribution signal reflect only Vm’s direct mixture-path effect, not its indirect effect on routing (elaborated in §3.3 and E). In this routing network, the query Q(s; θ) ∈ RD is an embedding of the current decision state s,and each key Km(s; θ, sg( Vm)) ∈ RD is an embedding of the action that program m recommends at s. The dot product Q(s; θ) · Km(s; θ, sg( Vm)) thus measures the alignment between what the state “asks for” and what program m “offers.” Using TSP as an example, both Q and K depend on the model parameters θ through the learned node embeddings, the design of Q follows the teacher model, encoding global information, the current-state context, and the first node context, while K

additionally incorporates the program output Vm through the construction 

Km(s; θ, sg( Vm)) = X

> n

sg( Vm(s, n )) · h(s, n ; θ) ∈ RD , (4) where h(s, n ; θ) is node embedding, and Km is the expectation of the selected node embeddings under distribution Vm(s).We adopt this for two reasons. First, it avoids introducing separately learned key parameters for each heuristic: the bank size M can evolve through Add and Drop events (§3.4) without architectural changes, and newly added heuristics inherit a well-defined routing key Km′ from their first forward pass, avoiding the routing instability that can arise from randomly initializing a new heuristic-specific key. Second, tying Km to Vm makes the router treats heuristics with similar outputs similarly. Similar action distributions induce similar routing keys, and hence similar routing weights under the same query. Thus the router depends on what each heuristic recommends at the current state, rather than on some arbitrary or spurious heuristic-specific key. 

Mixture forward. The student’s prediction is the routing-weighted mixture of the bank’s outputs, 

πS (· | s) = 

> M

X

> m=1

wm(s; θ, sg( V )) · Vm(s), (5) where the routing weights wm are produced by the routing network described in §3.1. 4Algorithm 1 Two-Block Training 

Require: Initial bank B0, routing parameters θ0, dataset D, validation set Dval  

> 1:

B ← B 0; θ ← θ0 

> 2:

repeat // Inner block: hybrid optimization at fixed M 

> 3:

repeat  

> 4:

θ ← θ − η ∇θ L(θ, B) ▷ SGD on routing  

> 5:

B ← TEXT GRAD STEP (B, θ, D) ▷ TextGrad on bank contents  

> 6:

until Lval plateaus 

// Outer block: capacity revision  

> 7:

B ← ADD (B, D, Dval ) ▷ Alg. 2  

> 8:

B ← DROP (B, Dval ) ▷ Alg. 3  

> 9:

until B unchanged by both A DD and D ROP 10: return (θ, B)

3.2 Two-block Optimization for EPB 

Recovering the bottleneck requires resolving three coupled quantities: (i) what heuristics should populate the bank B, (ii) how the router should compose them through w, and (iii) how many entries the bank needs, M . These questions span disparate parameter spaces. Concretely, (ii) lives in a continuous space amenable to SGD, whereas (i) and (iii) are symbolic and discrete: (i) requires textual rewrites of the code strategies, while (iii) requires changes to the bank cardinality. No single optimizer descends naturally across all three at once. Gradient descent cannot modify the discrete existence or cardinality of heuristics, while coarse bank-level edits lack the precision to optimize routing weights. We therefore separate them by update mechanism and timescale into a nested, two-block optimization. In the outer loop, Block II dynamically evolves the bank capacity M : Add spawns new specialists for failure modes the current bank cannot resolve, and Drop prunes heuristics whose decision behavior is redundant with the rest of the bank (§3.4). In the inner loop, Block I freezes the bank size M

to jointly optimize the bottleneck via Hybrid Textual-Numerical Gradient Descent, updating the Heuristic Bank via TextGrad and routing parameters via SGD under a shared distillation objective (§3.3). After each capacity revision, Block I refines the heuristics and router under the new fixed capacity before EPB considers another capacity change. The full schedule is given in Algorithm 1. 

3.3 Fixed-Capacity Evolution: Hybrid Textual-Numerical Gradient Descent 

We describe the optimization scheme that jointly trains the continuous routing network parameters 

θ and the symbolic bank B under the shared distillation loss L(θ, B). The routing parameters are updated by standard gradient-based optimization, while the bank is updated through TextGrad [ 8]. TextGrad turns loss-driven feedback signals into textual revisions of the code implementations and natural language descriptions of heuristics in B, which are applied through LLM calls. For a decision state s, we define the per-state distillation loss as 

ℓs(θ, B) = KL( πT (· | s) ∥ πS (· | s; θ, B)) , L(θ, B) = Es∼D [ℓs(θ, B)] , (6) where the student policy is the routing-weighted mixture in Eq. 5. Let rs = ∇πS (·| s)ℓs(θ, B) denote the mixture-level gradient. Note that the heuristic output Vm(s) enters the student prediction through two paths. First, it acts as the value in the mixture in Eq. 5, so changing Vm(s) directly changes the student action distribution. Second, it is used to construct the routing key Km in Eq. 4; without stop-gradient, this path would induce a second gradient term ∂ℓ s/∂V m(s) flowing back through the routing weights. We stop only this second (gradient) path: 

∂w j (s; θ, sg( V )) 

∂V m(s) = 0 .

The router is still conditioned on Vm(s) in the forward pass, but gradients from the routing weights do not flow back into the heuristic outputs (elaborated in §E). 5As derived in §F, the first-order gradient flow induced by the mixture decomposes into 

∇Vm(s)ℓs = wm(s; θ, sg( V )) rs, ∇θ ℓs =

> M

X

> m=1

⟨rs, V m(s)⟩ ∇ θ wm(s; θ, sg( V )) . (7) The first term provides the feedback signal used to revise each heuristic output. It assigns the mixture-level error signal rs to heuristic m in proportion to its routing weight wm(s). The second term is a standard numerical gradient for updating the routing network θ.

Numerical signal driving textual updates. A standalone TextGrad backward call assumes a one-to-one mapping between a textual variable and its failure cases: the gradient for that variable is computed directly from the failures attributed to it. Our setting is structurally different: the bank’s M

heuristics jointly produce each prediction through the routing-weighted mixture, so a failed prediction is a property of the mixture rather than of any single heuristic. We therefore use the mixture gradient to identify which heuristic should receive textual feedback before invoking TextGrad. The first term in Eq. 7 gives the direct mixture-path sensitivity assigned to heuristic m:

gout  

> m

(s) = wm(s; θ, sg( V )) rs. (8) If Vm(s) were an ordinary differentiable parameter, gout  

> m

(s) would be the gradient propagated to it through the mixture. In our model, however, Vm(s) is produced by executable code and is not updated by SGD. We therefore use this quantity only as an attribution signal for textual revision. Since gout  

> m

(s) is a vector, we first, naturally, consider a norm-based scalarization, 

gout  

> m

(s) ∞ = wm(s; θ, sg( V )) ∥rs∥∞ . (9) However, for a fixed state s, ∥rs∥∞ is shared by all heuristics. ∥gout  

> m

(s)∥∞ therefore distinguishes heuristics only through their routing weights. A large routing weight indicates that the heuristic contributes strongly to the mixture prediction, but it does not by itself indicate that the heuristic should be updated. The heuristic should receive textual feedback only when it is both used by the mixture and wrong relative to the teacher. We therefore replace the shared norm ∥rs∥∞ in Eq. 9 with a heuristic-specific failure term. For near-deterministic teachers, we instantiate this proxy as 

score m(s) = wm(s; θ, sg( V )) 

| {z }

> heuristic’s contribution to mixture

· 1



arg max  

> a∈A (s)

Vm(s, a )̸ = n⋆(s)

| {z }

> top-action disagreement

· KL( πT (· | s) ∥ Vm(s)) 

| {z }

> deviation from teacher output

.

(10) where n⋆(s) = arg max a∈A (s) πT (a | s) is the teacher’s top action. The score is large when heuristic 

m is used by the mixture and wrong relative to the teacher. For each heuristic, we keep the top-K

states under this score and pass these failure cases to TextGrad for textual revision. It is worth emphasizing that the failure-attribution score is a selection mechanism, not a gradient update. It ranks heuristic-sample pairs to decide which failures receive a TextGrad backward call. The bank itself is not updated by applying gout  

> m

(s) as a numerical gradient; rather, TextGrad converts the selected failures into natural-language update directions for rewriting cm and dm.

Textual outputs driving numerical updates. The interaction also goes in the reverse direction, where the bank’s current outputs Vm(s) affect the numerical optimization of the router parameters. In Eq. 7, the gradient for θ depends on the heuristic outputs through the terms ⟨rs, V m(s)⟩. Therefore, when TextGrad rewrites a heuristic and changes its output distribution, it also changes the student mixture and the subsequent SGD gradient used to train the router. 

Closed-loop Textual-Numerical Optimization. The two coupling directions close the training loop under the shared loss L. The resulting procedure follows an approximate block coordinate descent 

structure with heterogeneous blocks: 

θt+1 = θt − ηt∇θ L(θt, Bt), Ftm = TopK s score tm(s),

∆text ,t m = TG -Backward  ctm, d tm, Ftm

 , (ct+1  

> m

, d t+1  

> m

) = TG -Step  ctm, d tm, ∆text ,t m

 . (11) Here, TG -Backward uses an LLM to turn the selected failures Ftm into a natural-language critique 

∆text ,t m of (ctm, d tm), and TG -Step uses an LLM to rewrite (ctm, d tm) following this critique. The 6router parameter θ is updated by SGD at every batch, while the symbolic block B is updated periodically. This asymmetric schedule reflects the different granularity and cost of the two updates. SGD makes small numerical updates to the router, whereas each TextGrad step rewrites the bank heuristics and may substantially change the heuristic output distribution. 

3.4 Bank Capacity Evolution: Slot Add and Drop 

Rather than fixing M , we adapt the bank size during training. This is necessary because the appropriate capacity is not known a priori. If M is too small, the bank may lack the heuristics needed to explain the teacher’s behavior across diverse states. If M is too large, multiple heuristics may learn similar decision behavior, making the bank redundant and harder to interpret. We thus introduce two capacity refinement strategies: Add , which spawns new specialists for uncovered failure modes, and 

Drop , which prunes redundant or inactive heuristics. Both are triggered upon a training plateau, a regime in which the training loss changes only marginally. 

Failure-Mode-Targeted Spawning (Add). Upon a training plateau, the Add operation searches for failure cases that suggest missing bank capacity. We collect decision steps where every heuristic fails since these cases are unlikely to be fixed by changing routing weights alone. The fault set is presented to the LLM, which partitions it into K hypothesized failure-modes, each paired with a candidate heuristic. The candidate heuristics are then refined on the same fault subset. At each refinement round, each fault state is assigned to the candidate whose current output is closest to the teacher, and each candidate receives TextGrad feedback from its assigned states. Refinement proceeds over several rounds, and a code edit is accepted only if it improves agreement with teacher output on a held-out split. Surviving candidates are added to the bank. See Algorithm 2 in §G for details. 

Redundant-Target Removing (Drop). Upon a training plateau, we perform greedy leave-one-out pruning over the bank. For each heuristic, we measure how much the validation loss of the student mixture increases when that heuristic is removed, and drop the one with the smallest increase if it stays within a preset tolerance. After each removal, we recompute the leave-one-out degradation for the remaining heuristics, and the pruning terminates when no further heuristic can be safely dropped, a per-call drop limit is reached, or the bank reaches its minimum size. This keeps the portfolio compact by eliminating heuristics whose contribution is largely covered by the rest of the bank. See Algorithm 3 in §G for details. 

## 4 Experiments 

We evaluate our method by distilling POMO (TSP-50/100, CVRP-50/100) and LEHD (TSP-100, CVRP-100); detailed experimental settings are provided in §H. We present an example of the prompt setting in §I (LEHD TSP-100). Two training curve examples are shown in Fig. 2, where the hybrid gradient and bank capacity management jointly improve the student model’s top-1 accuracy across settings, refining the heuristic bank and helping escape performance plateaus. 

4.1 Distillation Results Distillation with small information loss. Table 1 compares the teacher and student performance. Under greedy decoding, where the policy selects the highest-probability action at each step, the student Table 1: Teacher vs. Student on TSP and CVRP (mean tour cost; lower is better).                                                     

> Model Problem Size Greedy Search Teacher Student Gap (%) Teacher Student Gap (%)
> POMO TSP 50 5.712 5.884 +3 .02 5.696 5.698 +0 .03
> TSP 100 7.834 8.130 +3 .79 7.796 7.803 +0 .10
> CVRP 50 11.536 11.655 +1 .03 10.793 10.807 +0 .13
> CVRP 100 16.188 16.826 +3 .94 15.882 16.080 +1 .25
> LEHD TSP 100 7.758 7.962 +2 .63 7.708 7.739 +0 .40
> CVRP 100 16.282 16.857 +3 .60 15.969 16.314 +2 .16

71 10 20 30 40 50 60            

> epoch
> 0.76
> 0.78
> 0.80
> 0.82
> top1 accuracy
> M: 15 13 15
> M: 15 12
> M: 12 15
> M: 15 18
> 1510 15 20
> epoch
> 0.88
> 0.90
> 0.92
> 0.94
> top1 accuracy
> M: 8 11
> TextGrad epoch Slot drop / add

Figure 2: Top-1 accuracy during training. Left, POMO-CVRP-50; Right, LEHD-TSP-100 Table 2: High-level summary of distilled heuristic banks. 

Bank High-level behavior 

POMO TSP-50/100 Phase-adaptive tour construction. The heuristics frequently condition on tour progress or the number of unvisited cities, shifting from early hull/outlier/isola-tion exploration to late start-aware closure and multi-step completion lookahead. LEHD TSP-100 Local geometric correction. The heuristics are mainly driven by the current city, start city, and remaining-set geometry, producing short-step, insertion-cost, two-step closure, angular-sweep, and pocket-cleaning behaviors. POMO CVRP-50/100 Capacity-aware route construction. The heuristics combine proximity, Clarke– Wright savings, angular/sector coherence, demand fit, and depot-return decisions, adapting behavior according to remaining vehicle capacity. LEHD CVRP-100 Local capacity-aware route construction. The heuristics are mainly driven by the current location, depot, remaining-customer geometry, and remaining capacity, producing short-step continuation, Clarke–Wright savings, demand-fit packing, depot-anchored angular-sweep, and load-triggered depot-return behaviors. 

stays close to the teachers, with gaps within 1-4% ; after enabling search (multi-start for POMO, random-reconstruction for LEHD), gaps shrink to 0.03% -1.25% against POMO, and 0.40% -2.16% 

against LEHD. In §J, we show that the student model closely replicates the teacher’s performance, with plots and statistical analysis for TSP. While the student imitates teacher-induced solution distributions rather than learning from scratch, it meaningfully replaces the black-box policy with a compact, human-readable heuristic bank with only a negligible loss in solution quality. A summary of the distilled heuristics is in Table 2, the full gallery in §K, and two sample codes in §L. 

Distilled surrogate exhibits better OOD generalization than the teacher. A more exciting case in Table 3 occurs under zero-shot transfer to much larger instances. On POMO-TSP-500, the surrogate does not merely match its teacher but substantially outperforms it, with gaps of −15 .01% under greedy decoding and −14 .32% after search; the same pattern holds on POMO-CVRP-500, where it leads by −13 .57% (greedy) and −15 .22% (search). POMO’s own generalization falls well short of expectations at these sizes, and the programmatic bottleneck acts as a useful inductive bias: while the teacher encodes problem-size-specific artifacts that degrade on larger instances, the student is constrained to compose explicit heuristics that transfer more robustly across sizes. Tellingly, even for LEHD, a model explicitly designed for cross-size generalization, our distilled student remains closely on par with its teacher. EPB thus does more than make a black-box policy readable: it distills Table 3: Out-of-distribution generalization results on unseen problem sizes. 

Greedy Search Experiment Teacher Student Gap (%) Teacher Student Gap (%) POMO-TSP-500 22.180 18.852 −15 .01 20.464 17.532 −14 .32 

POMO-CVRP-500 50.600 43.579 −13 .57 48.502 41.030 −15 .22 

LEHD-TSP-50 5.761 5.919 +2 .74 5.728 5.729 +0 .03 

LEHD-TSP-500 16.820 17.628 +4 .80 16.586 17.138 +3 .33 

8Figure 3: Phase-aware vs geometry-aware: POMO vs LEHD. We show top five dominant heuristics ranked by their assigned routing weights. Colors indicate heuristic categories. POMO is dominated by phase-aware heuristics, while LEHD relies more on geometry-aware and lookahead heuristics. an explicit, composable logic and discards overfitted patterns, ensuring robust size generalization across problem sizes. 

4.2 Analysis of Distilled Heuristic 

Figure 4: POMO-TSP-100 Case study. Dev: cases where the nearest neighbor is not selected. The highlighted heuristic has the highest router weigh at that step. 

Interpreting decision steps. Us-ing POMO-TSP-100 as an exam-ple, the distilled heuristics admit a direct geometric explanation of the decision. We focus on steps where the model deviates from selecting the nearest neighbor (NN), since NN already matches 

∼83% of local decisions along high-quality tours and the devi-ations are where nontrivial be-havior surfaces. As shown in Fig. 4, only 16/99 steps deviate from NN, and each appears in re-gions consistent with the heuristic’s description: H02 ( hull-sweep early ) fires on outer convex-hull vertices during the opening segment, consistent with the classical boundary-before-interior strategy; H04 ( isolated rescue ) activates in sparse pockets where pure NN may leave isolated points for costly later detours; H01 ( far-from-depot first ) fires on points distal to the start city, deferring near-depot nodes to close the tour. The bank thus captures interpretable and geometrical routing principles rather than serving only as a post-hoc explanation. 

POMO plans by phase, LEHD corrects by geometry. Extending the above TSP analysis, Figure 3 reveals a clear difference between the two distilled surrogates. POMO’s non-NN decisions are predominantly assigned to phase-conditioned heuristics that depend on tour progress or the number of remaining cities, whereas LEHD’s are more frequently assigned to heuristics driven by local geometry, distance structure, and closure-related correction. Tables 7 and 8 show that the POMO-distilled bank is more phase-adaptive: many heuristics explicitly condition on tour progress or the number of unvisited cities, shifting from early hull/outlier exploration to late start-aware closure. The LEHD-distilled bank is instead more locally geometric, depending mainly on the geometry-aware selection (H00, H04, H06, H07), insertion-cost or closure lookahead (H01–H04), angular sweep (H05, H08, H09), and pocket cleaning (H10). This suggests that the POMO-distilled sur- rogate uses more phase-dependent tour-construction rules, while the LEHD-distilled surrogate emphasizes local geometric corrections. This is consistent with LEHD’s stronger OOD generalization, since local geometric rules may transfer better than rules tied to a fixed tour-progress schedule. 

From sector exploration to depot return: stage-wise POMO-CVRP logic. Figure 5 shows that POMO deploys different heuristics across construction stages (full gallery in Table 9). Two strategies dominate: H00 (proximity-dominant with low-load depot-return control) and H01 (combining proximity, angular coherence, Clarke–Wright savings, and demand efficiency). Early , with high 9Figure 5: CVRP Heuristic Activation Across Route Progress (200 instances) remaining capacity, the model uses sector-structured exploration (H03, H04, H17), directionally coherent or arc-cost-aware continuation (H06, H08, H11), and occasional service of distant high-demand customers (H10). Mid-route , it shifts to savings-proximity and nearest-feasible variants (H02, H13, H14), capacity-adaptive continuation (H05), and frontier exploration (H07). Late , as capacity drops, it favors on-the-way customers (H09, H16), with depot return promoted by low-load signals (H00, H12). Overall, the policy exhibits a clear transition: from sector-level structure, to proximity and capacity fit, to depot-oriented closure that picks up on-the-way customers before returning. 

4.3 Ablation Studies 

Figure 6: Top-1 accuracy across three ablation studies. 

Ablation on hybrid gradients. Fig-ure 6 (Left) shows that numerical gradients alone yield limited gains, TextGrad accelerates early training, but both saturate at fixed bank size. 

Ablation on capacity management. 

In Figure 6 (Left), activating it at epoch 25 produces a clear accuracy jump and breaks the plateau. 

Ablation on dynamic routing. Fig-ure 6 (Right) shows OCDR (solid) uni-formly outperforms a static-key base-line (dashed) in both cases. 

## 5 Conclusion 

We propose Evolving Programmatic Bottlenecks (EPB), which distills black-box NCO policies into human-readable program portfolios. A state-dependent router dynamically combines these programs to approximate the teacher policy at each construction step. To optimize EPB, we introduce Hybrid Gradient Descent and slot management. EPB uncovers solver- and problem-specific decision structures, showing that on TSP, the POMO-distilled surrogate is more phase-adaptive while the LEHD-distilled surrogate is more geometry-driven, and on CVRP, decisions further exhibit capacity-dependent behavior; these distilled programmatic bottlenecks can preserve and even improve out-of-distribution generalization. One limitation is that the router still remains a black-box neural network. Replacing it with a simpler or fully programmatic routing rule could make the student more transparent, although this may come at a cost in performance. Meanwhile, while EPB represents a first step in interpreting NCO model behavior, it yields a distilled surrogate and cannot guarantee a perfect proxy for the original black-box policy. Future work can extend EPB to more complex constrained NCO settings, where interpretable program portfolios may help diagnose model weaknesses and improve generalization. Our code will be made available on GitHub upon publication. 10 Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI Singapore AI Research Fundamental Research Collaborative (US-NSF Researcher Call) (AISG Award No: AISG3-RP-2025-036-USNSF). 

## References 

[1] Wouter Kool, Herke Van Hoof, and Max Welling. Attention, learn to solve routing problems! In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. [2] Yeong-Dae Kwon, Jinho Choo, Byoungjip Kim, Iljoo Yoon, Youngjune Gwon, and Seungjai Min. Pomo: Policy optimization with multiple optima for reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020. [3] Fu Luo, Xi Lin, Fei Liu, Qingfu Zhang, and Zhenkun Wang. Neural combinatorial optimization with heavy decoder: Toward large scale generalization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:8845–8864, 2023. [4] Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In European conference on computer vision , pages 818–833. Springer, 2014. [5] Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim, and Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5338–5348. PMLR, 2020. [6] David Steinmann, Wolfgang Stammer, Felix Friedrich, and Kristian Kersting. Learning to intervene on concept bottlenecks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13453 , 2023. [7] Shirley Wu, Mert Yuksekgonul, Linjun Zhang, and James Zou. Discover and cure: Concept-aware mitigation of spurious correlation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 37765–37786. PMLR, 2023. [8] Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. Textgrad: Automatic" differentiation" via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496 , 2024. [9] Zhiqing Sun and Yiming Yang. Difusco: Graph-based diffusion solvers for combinatorial optimization. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:3706–3731, 2023. [10] Irwan Bello, Hieu Pham, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, and Samy Bengio. Neural combinatorial optimization with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09940 , 2016. [11] Mohammadreza Nazari, Afshin Oroojlooy, Lawrence Snyder, and Martin Takác. Reinforcement learning for solving the vehicle routing problem. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. [12] Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly. Pointer networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2015. [13] Jinho Choo, Yeong-Dae Kwon, Jihoon Kim, Jeongwoo Jae, André Hottung, Kevin Tierney, and Youngjune Gwon. Simulation-guided beam search for neural combinatorial optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:8760–8772, 2022. [14] André Hottung, Yeong-Dae Kwon, and Kevin Tierney. Efficient active search for combinatorial optimization problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [15] Yining Ma, Jingwen Li, Zhiguang Cao, Wen Song, Le Zhang, Zhenghua Chen, and Jing Tang. Learning to iteratively solve routing problems with dual-aspect collaborative transformer. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, pages 11096–11107, 2021. [16] Yaoxin Wu, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, Jie Zhang, and Andrew Lim. Learning improvement heuristics for solving routing problems. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 2021. [17] Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie J. Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda Viegas, and Rory Sayres. Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept activation vectors (tcav). In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2018. [18] Amirata Ghorbani, James Wexler, James Y. Zou, and Been Kim. Towards automatic concept-based explanations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019. 

11 [19] Mert Yuksekgonul, Maggie Wang, and James Zou. Post-hoc concept bottleneck models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15480 , 2022. [20] Divyansh Srivastava, Ge Yan, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Vlg-cbm: Training concept bottleneck models with vision-language guidance. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [21] Akshay Kulkarni, Ge Yan, Chung-En Sun, Tuomas Oikarinen, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Interpretable generative models through post-hoc concept bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8162–8171, 2025. [22] Chung-En Sun, Tuomas Oikarinen, Berk Ustun, and Tsui-Wei Weng. Concept bottleneck large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [23] Zhiqin Zhang, Yining Ma, Zhiguang Cao, and Hoong Chuin Lau. Probing neural combinatorial optimization models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22131 , 2025. [24] Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. 

Science , 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022. [25] Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco JR Ruiz, Jordan S Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature , 625(7995):468–475, 2024. [26] Fei Liu, Xialiang Tong, Mingxuan Yuan, Xi Lin, Fu Luo, Zhenkun Wang, Zhichao Lu, and Qingfu Zhang. Evolution of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02051 , 2024. [27] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021. [28] Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and Charles Sutton. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 , 2021. [29] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems ,36:8634–8652, 2023. [30] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:11809–11822, 2023. [31] Eric J Michaud, Isaac Liao, Vedang Lad, Ziming Liu, Anish Mudide, Chloe Loughridge, Zifan Carl Guo, Tara Rezaei Kheirkhah, Mateja Vukeli´ c, and Max Tegmark. Opening the ai black box: program synthesis via mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05110 , 2024. [32] Dweep Trivedi, Jesse Zhang, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joseph J. Lim. Learning to synthesize programs as interpretable and generalizable policies. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. [33] Quentin Delfosse, Hikaru Shindo, Devendra Dhami, and Kristian Kersting. Interpretable and explainable logical policies via neurally guided symbolic abstraction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [34] Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Maheep Chaudhary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christopher Potts, and Thomas Icard. Causal abstraction: A theoretical foundation for mechanistic interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04709 , 2023. [35] Abhinav Verma, Vijay Murali, Rishabh Singh, Pushmeet Kohli, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Programmatically interpretable reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2018. 

12 Interpreting Neural Combinatorial Optimization via Evolving Programmatic Bottlenecks (Appendix) 

A Related Work 14 B TSP and CVRP 14 C Teacher/Student NCO model Structure 15 D biHierarchical Symbolic Optimization 16 E On the Necessity of the Stop-gradient 16 F Derivation of the Hybrid Gradient Decomposition 17 G Add and Drop Algorithms 19 H Experiment Setting & LLM Robustness 20 I Prompt Setting 21 

I.1 Pipeline overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 I.2 Shared context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 I.3 Phase I — initial proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 I.4 Phase II — TextGrad refinement loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 

J Imitation Analysis 26 K Heuristic Gallery 4 29 L Code Example 37 M License 39 N Code Public Statement 39 

13 A Related Work 

Neural combinatorial optimization. Traditional approaches to combinatorial optimization often rely on human-designed heuristics to construct solutions, which require domain expertise and are often problem-specific. Recently, Neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) instead learns such decision policies in a data-driven way, with architectures such as autoregressive attention models and diffusion-based solvers [ 1– 3, 9 – 12 ]. Subsequent works improve performance through enhanced decoding strategies, symmetry-aware designs, and search-based refinement procedures [ 13 – 16 ]. However, these black-box policies may entangle multiple algorithmic heuristics without exposing their decision structure to users. Our work addresses this gap by distilling black-box NCO policies into executable heuristic portfolios, making their sequential decision logic explicit and human-readable. 

Concept-based interpretability. Concept-based interpretability explains model behavior through human-understandable intermediate variables, including concept activation vectors [ 17 ] and concepts derived from learned representations [ 18 ]. Concept bottleneck models (CBMs) instantiate this idea with an explicit f (g(x)) factorization, where g maps inputs to predefined concepts before final prediction [ 5]. Later work reduces annotation needs by deriving concept vectors from pretrained representations and measuring their alignment with model embeddings [ 19 ], and extends CBMs to more scalable, multimodal, and generative settings [ 20 –22 ]. These approaches are natural in vision and language, where concepts often correspond to human-nameable attributes or textual descriptions. In NCO, probing methods test whether predefined decision-related properties are recoverable from learned embeddings using lightweight predictors [ 23 ]. However, the relevant explanatory units for NCO are not fixed attributes of an input instance. They are algorithmic decision rules that are difficult to enumerate in advance, and their relevance can change as the solution is built sequentially. EPB addresses this challenge by (1) reformulating concepts as executable code rather than static feature vectors to represent complex heuristics, and (2) introducing a dynamic programmatic bottleneck whose active heuristics can change as solutions are constructed sequentially. 

LLM-guided algorithm discovery. Recent work leverages large language models (LLMs) as generators within search-based frameworks for automatic algorithm discovery [ 8 , 24 – 26 ]. Early efforts demonstrate that LLMs can synthesize executable programs for complex problem-solving tasks [ 24 , 27 , 28 ]. Building on this, FunSearch [ 25 ] and EoH [ 26 ] combine LLM-based generation with evolutionary search to iteratively refine candidate programs, with EoH further augmenting this process by co-evolving natural language “thoughts” and code. More recently, gradient-based approaches such as TextGrad [ 8 ] treat LLM outputs as differentiable objects and iteratively refine programs via textual gradients, alongside broader efforts on LLM-guided optimization and self-improvement [ 29 , 30 ]. These methods discover standalone heuristics, whereas EPB explains trained NCO policies through their decision behavior. This makes EPB compatible with new NCO architectures while yielding a lightweight, human-readable distilled solver. 

Policy Distillation. Recent work has explored distilling learned neural policies and algorithms into executable code or symbolic programs for improved interpretability [ 31 , 32 ]. These approaches aim to recover human-readable algorithms from trained neural networks through program synthesis [ 31 ], symbolic abstraction [ 33 ], or mechanistic analysis [ 34 ]. Related work in interpretable reinforcement learning distills policies into compact programs or decision rules [ 32 , 35 ]. However, existing methods primarily focus on reinforcement learning environments, internal neural mechanisms, or direct program induction, rather than sequential heuristic extraction for NCO. EPB instead distills NCO policies into dynamically selected executable heuristics that remain faithful to the original policy while exposing interpretable decision structure. 

## B TSP and CVRP 

TSP The Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) is defined on a set of n nodes, where each node i is associated with a coordinate xi ∈ R2. A problem instance is denoted by s = {x1, . . . , x n}, typically sampled i.i.d. from a distribution over the plane (e.g., uniform in the unit square). A feasible solution to TSP is a permutation π = ( π1, . . . , π n) of the nodes, representing a tour that visits each node exactly once and returns to the starting node. The total cost of a tour is defined as 

L(π | s) = 

> n

X

> t=1

d(xπt , x πt+1 ),

14 where d(·, ·) denotes the Euclidean distance between the two nodes and πn+1 = π1. The objective of TSP is to find a permutation π∗ that minimizes the total tour cost: π∗ = arg min π L(π | s) In neural combinatorial optimization settings, solutions are constructed by sequentially selecting the next node to visit conditioning on the current state: 

p(π | s) = 

> n

Y

> t=1

p(πt | s, π 1: t−1),

where previously visited nodes are excluded from the candidate set to ensure valid tours. 

CVRP The Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP) is defined on a set of n customer nodes and a depot. Each customer node i is associated with a location xi in R2 and a demand di > 0, and the depot has location x0. Node locations and customer demands are drawn from a fixed distribution. A feasible solution to CVRP consists of a set of routes, where each route starts and ends at the depot and visits a subset of customers. The total demand served in each route must not exceed the vehicle capacity C. The objective is to construct a set of routes that visits all customers while minimizing the total travel cost: 

L(π | s) = X

> routes
> |π|

X

> t=1

d(xπt , x πt+1 ),

where each route is represented as a sequence π of visited nodes, and π|π|+1 includes returning to the depot at the end of the route. In neural combinatorial optimization settings, solutions are generated by sequentially selecting the next node conditioned on the current partial route and the remaining vehicle capacity. Nodes who have already been served or whose demand exceeds the remaining capacity are masked to ensure feasibility. 

## C Teacher/Student NCO model Structure 

We use POMO [ 2] and LEHD [ 3] as representative black-box NCO teachers. Both models define an autoregressive policy over feasible future actions, but they differ in architecture, training procedure, and inference strategy. 

POMO POMO is an attention-based reinforcement learning solver for combinatorial optimization. Its key idea is to harness the fact that many routing solutions have multiple equivalent solutions (evaluated by the relevant downstream metric). For example, a TSP solution cycle can be represented by starting from any city. POMO uses this symmetry by generating multiple rollout trajectories from different starting nodes for each problem instance for training. During inference. This encourages to model to explore multiple equivalent optima rather than anchoring to a single starting point. During inference, POMO generates multiple greedy trajectories from different starting nodes and selects the best solution. 

LEHD LEHD was proposed to improve generalization to large-scale problem instances. Earlier constructive NCO models often use a heavy-encoder/light-decoder structure, where node embeddings are computed once by the encoder and then reused throughout sequential decoding. This static embedding strategy can encourage the model to learn scale-dependent features, which may hurt performance when generalizing to larger instances. LEHD instead uses a lightweight encoder and a heavy decoder that dynamically captures relationships among the current partial solution and the available nodes at each construction step. LEHD is further trained with partial-solution augmentation. Given an optimal tour, it samples consecutive subsequences with random lengths and directions, and treats each subsequence as an augmented training example. The model then learns to reconstruct each partial solution step by step. At inference time, LEHD constructs full solutions greedily and can further improve them with Random Re-Construct, which repeatedly reconstructs sampled solution segments and accepts a replacement only if it improves the objective. 

Student Model Similar to Concept Bottleneck Models, our student router is designed to follow the architecture of the corresponding teacher model while exposing an interpretable intermediate decision layer. For both TSP and CVRP, the goal is to obtain node embeddings that serve as the input representation for the router network. For POMO-based teachers, we train an POMO encoder to 15 compute these embeddings. For LEHD-based teachers, since the decision representation is formed deeper in the model, we use the LEHD encoder together with few decoder layers to obtain the node embeddings. 

## D biHierarchical Symbolic Optimization 

A heuristic can fail for two structurally different reasons. Its implementation may have a local bug, or its underlying strategy may be wrong for the failure mode it covers. This motivates a hierarchical strategy that updates the natural language description dm and the code implementation cm of each heuristic in a self-consistent way. A dispatcher selects which heuristics enter this update phase based on accumulated failure attribution scores from Section 3.3. Phase 1 attempts local code refinement, and Phase 2 escalates to strategy-level revision only when Phase 1 cannot resolve the failure. The TextGrad framework gives us two distinct channels per bank entry: backward calls on the code 

cm, and backward calls on the natural-language description dm. We do not run the two channels simultaneously. Instead, we organize them into a two-phase hierarchical procedure: Phase 1 acts only on cm, attempting local code refinement, and Phase 2 acts only on dm (with cm subsequently re-implemented from the revised description), invoked only when Phase 1 cannot resolve the failure. For each selected heuristic, Phase 1 attempts up to R rounds of TextGrad on cm. After each update, the candidate cm is evaluated on a held-out validation set. If the validation loss with the teacher distribution improves over the pre-substitution bank’s by at least δ, the candidate is retained and dm

is regenerated from the new code to reflect the updated implementation. If no update results from Phase 1, this indicates the failure is strategy-level rather than implementation-level. Phase 2 then updates dm via TextGrad on description-level gradients, and cm is re-implemented from the revised dm. The new code is committed under the same validation criterion. If both phases fail to commit a new heuristic, the description is reverted and the heuristic is left unchanged. In this way, the bank maintains internally aligned (cm, d m) pairs regardless of the sequence of changes. 

TextGrad backward output formats          

> TextGrad’s backward LLM call produces a structured natural-language diagnostic in one of two formats, depending on the channel.
> Code channel (backward on cm, four fields):
> LOGIC: [what the code currently computes for ranking these top candidates] TEACHER: [what features of the teacher’s pick the code should recognize] FLAW: [why the code’s score for the teacher’s pick fell behind the wrong argmax] DIRECTION: [what change would push the teacher’s pick above the wrong argmax]
> Description channel (backward on dm, three fields):
> MISSING: [what geometric reasoning the description omits or under-emphasizes] MISLEADING: [anything in the description that points the implementation in the wrong direction] DIRECTION: [how the description should be revised]

## E On the Necessity of the Stop-gradient 

The stop-gradient in Eq. 4 is a design choice rather than a requirement. The router parameters θ

are continuous and updated by SGD, while the heuristic outputs Vm(s) are produced by executable code and revised by TextGrad; Vm(s) is never updated by gradients regardless of whether the path is stopped. Removing the stop-gradient would only add a second term to ∇Vm(s)ℓs, flowing through the routing key Km. Since this gradient is used not as an update but as an attribution signal for selecting which heuristic receives textual feedback (Eq. 8 and Eq. 10), stopping the routing path keeps the signal clean: it isolates Vm(s)’s direct effect on the mixture from its indirect effect on 16 routing, so that the gradients on θ and on Vm(s) no longer share a path and update their respective channels independently. The resulting attribution signal is intuitive, ∇Vm(s)ℓs = wm(s; θ, sg( V )) rs:the mixture-level error rs measures how wrong the current prediction is, and the routing weight wm

scales it by how much heuristic m contributed, so a heuristic is blamed only when it is both heavily used and pointing the mixture in the wrong direction. 

## F Derivation of the Hybrid Gradient Decomposition 

We derive the gradient decomposition used in §3.3. For a fixed decision state s, the student policy is the routing-weighted mixture 

πS (· | s) = 

> M

X

> m=1

wm(s; θ, sg( V )) Vm(s). (12) For readability, write 

¯V = sg( V ), wm = wm(s; θ, ¯V ), Vm = Vm(s).

Then Eq. 12 becomes 

πS (· | s) = 

> M

X

> m=1

wmVm. (13) Consider small perturbations 

Vm 7 → Vm + δV m, θ 7 → θ + δθ. 

The corresponding first-order perturbation of the student mixture is 

δπ S (· | s) = 

> M

X

> m=1

h

(wm + δw m)( Vm + δV m) − wmVm

i

=

> M

X

> m=1

(wm δV m + Vm δw m) + O(∥δ∥2),

(14) where the second-order term (i.e. P 

> m

δw m δV m) is omitted. The routing weights depend on θ and on the detached heuristic outputs ¯V = sg( V ), as in Eq. 3. Hence their first-order perturbation is 

δw m = ∇θ wm(s; θ, ¯V ), δθ + ∇ ¯V wm(s; θ, ¯V ), δ ¯V . (15) Since ¯V = sg( V ), perturbations of V do not propagate through the router: 

δ ¯V = 0 , ∂w j (s; θ, sg( V )) 

∂V m(s) = 0 ∀j, m ∈ [M ]. (16) Therefore, 

δw m = ⟨∇ θ wm(s; θ, sg( V )) , δθ ⟩ . (17) Substituting Eq. 17 into Eq. 14 gives 

δπ S (· | s) = 

> M

X

> m=1

wm(s; θ, sg( V )) δV m(s) + 

> M

X

> m=1

Vm(s) ⟨∇ θ wm(s; θ, sg( V )) , δθ ⟩ . (18) Now define the mixture-level gradient 

rs = ∇πS (·| s)ℓs(θ, B). (19) By the first-order Taylor expansion of the loss around the current student output, 

δℓ s ≈ ⟨ rs, δπ S (· | s)⟩ . (20) 17 Combining Eq. 18 and Eq. 20, we obtain 

δℓ s ≈

> M

X

> m=1

⟨rs, w m(s; θ, sg( V )) δV m(s)⟩

+

> M

X

> m=1

⟨rs, V m(s)⟩ ⟨∇ θ wm(s; θ, sg( V )) , δθ ⟩

=

> M

X

> m=1

⟨wm(s; θ, sg( V )) rs, δV m(s)⟩

+

* MX

> m=1

⟨rs, V m(s)⟩ ∇ θ wm(s; θ, sg( V )) , δθ 

+

.

(21) Since a first-order perturbation can also be written as 

δℓ s ≈

> M

X

> m=1

∇Vm(s)ℓs, δV m(s) + ⟨∇ θ ℓs, δθ ⟩ ,

comparison with Eq. 21 yields 

∇Vm(s)ℓs = wm(s; θ, sg( V )) rs, (22) and 

∇θ ℓs =

> M

X

> m=1

⟨rs, V m(s)⟩ ∇ θ wm(s; θ, sg( V )) . (23) The first branch, ∇Vm(s)ℓs = wm(s)rs, is the direct mixture-path sensitivity used for textual failure attribution. The second branch, ∇θ ℓs, is the standard numerical gradient used to update the routing network. Because the router observes sg( V ), the indirect path from heuristic outputs to the loss through the router, 

Vm → w → πS → ℓs,

is removed. Thus the heuristic-output sensitivity contains only the direct path 

Vm → πS → ℓs.

18 G Add and Drop Algorithms 

In this appendix, we present the algorithmic details of the slot add-and-drop procedure. 

Algorithm 2 Failure-Mode-Targeted Bank Expansion (Add) 

Require: Existing bank B, dataset D, validation set Dval , teacher, LLM, threshold ρadmit 

Ensure: Expanded bank B+ 

> 1:

F ← decision steps on which every h ∈ B performs poorly  

> 2:

C ← LLM-P ROPOSE (F) ▷ LLM attributes failures into K buckets 

// Pretrain candidates on F 

> 3:

for round t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 4:

for each s ∈ F do ▷ assign each fault case to the best current candidate  

> 5:

assign s to h ∈ C whose output is closest to the teacher’s  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

for each h ∈ C do ▷ refine each candidate on its assigned fault cases  

> 8:

∇h ← TEXT GRAD (h, samples assigned to h) 

> 9:

h′ ← LLM-E DIT (h, ∇h) 

> 10:

replace h ← h′ if h′ improves agreement on a held-out split  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

end for // Greedy admission by marginal coverage gain  

> 13:

B+ ← B  

> 14:

while C̸ = ∅ do  

> 15:

h⋆ ← arg max h∈C 

C(B+ ∪ { h}; Dval ) − C(B+; Dval ) 

> 16:

∆⋆ ← C(B+ ∪ { h⋆}; Dval ) − C(B+; Dval ) 

> 17:

if ∆⋆ < ρ admit then  

> 18:

break  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

B+ ← B + ∪ { h⋆}; C ← C \ { h⋆} 

> 21:

end while  

> 22:

return B+

Algorithm 3 Redundant-Target Removing (Drop) 

Require: Current bank B, validation set Dval , student model, tolerance ϵ, max drops per call Dmax ,minimum bank size Mmin 

Ensure: Pruned bank B− 

> 1:

B− ← B ; d ← 0 

> 2:

L0 ← L val (B−; Dval ) ▷ baseline validation loss  

> 3:

while d < D max and |B −| > M min do  

> 4:

for each h ∈ B − do  

> 5:

Lh ← L val (B− \ { h}; Dval ) 

> 6:

δh ← Lh − L0 ▷ degradation from removing h 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

h⋆ ← arg min h∈B − δh 

> 9:

if δh⋆ > ϵ then  

> 10:

break ▷ no safe removal remains  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

B− ← B − \ { h⋆}; L0 ← Lh⋆ ; d ← d + 1  

> 13:

end while  

> 14:

return B−

19 H Experiment Setting & LLM Robustness                                                    

> TSP-50 TSP-100 CVRP-50 LEHD TSP-100
> Teacher / data POMO 100k POMO 100k POMO CVRP LEHD TSP-100
> Architecture
> embed dim 128 128 128 128 encoder layers 3463 (light) decoder layers –––3 (heavy) heads 8888FFN hidden ––512 512
> Optimisation
> batch size 4096 2048 16384 1024 learning rate 6×10 −43×10 −44×10 −41×10 −4
> epochs 144 80 50 50 AMP ––yes –
> Router
> routing mode dynamic dynamic dynamic dynamic (LEHD)
> TextGrad
> backward every (batches) 100 200 200 200

Table 4: Key hyperparameters of the best student checkpoints. TextGrad-related hyperparameters (start epoch and trigger frequency) can be read off the training curves; the complete set of parameters will be released together with the code and checkpoints. When the API budget is limited, we recommend monitoring the training process and enabling slot add-and-drop only once performance gains begin to diminish. All experiments were conducted on a workstation equipped with an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. By default, we use Claude Sonnet 4.6 and GPT-5.4 as the LLMs for heuristic generation and TextGrad rewriting. For LEHD-TSP, we instead adopt GPT-5 as the LLM optimizer. 

Robutness on LLM Model Used Figure 6 Right shows our framework is robust to LLM choice: replacing Claude Sonnet 4.6 with the substantially cheaper GPT-5 yields in fact slightly improved results. Taking LEHD-TSP-100 as an example, the current run uses 5,471 LLM calls and about 30.33M tokens, and this overhead can be further reduced by decreasing the number of samples kept in the TextGrad backward buffer. However, we observe that relatively simple models have a lower success rate when generating complex heuristic code (e.g., CVRP). 

Figure 7: Robustness on LLM Usage 20 I Prompt Setting 

I.1 Pipeline overview 

The training loop has two LLM-driven phases. (I) Proposal/init. For each new heuristic slot, the LLM is asked to (a) propose a strategy in natural language, then (b) implement that strategy as a Python module. (II) TextGrad refinement. On every batch, failure cases (where the heuristic’s argmax disagrees with the LEHD teacher’s) drive a backward pass that produces text gradients on the code and on the description; an optimizer prompt then synthesises those gradients into an updated module. A single shared context block ( _SPARSE_TEACHER_CONTEXT ) is embedded into every system prompt so all calls share the same problem framing. 

I.2 Shared context Shared context (_SPARSE_TEACHER_CONTEXT) 

**Subgraph decoder formulation (LEHD-style).** At each decoding step the heuristic receives ONLY the unvisited subgraph plus the start (first_loc) and current end (current_loc) of the partial tour. Visited nodes are NOT shown –- the input subgraph IS the remaining problem. The output is a score over the K candidate next-nodes, where K shrinks across the rollout from N-1 down to 1. Your code MUST work for ANY K. Progress within the tour is implicit: it is exposed ONLY through K (= unselected_locs.size(1)). No global N, step index, or step_norm is provided –- this matches what the LEHD teacher itself sees. If your strategy needs a "how-far-along" signal, derive it from the geometry of unselected_locs (e.g. spread, mean distance to first_loc) or from K itself, and AVOID hard-coded thresholds tied to a particular N. **Critical: the teacher distribution is near one-hot.** The teacher policy is a near-deterministic LEHD model: - top-1 candidate receives ~95% probability - top-2 candidate receives ~4.5% probability - the remaining K-2 candidates share less than 0.5% combined Two implications for heuristic design: 1. **Output sharp, decisive scores.** The winning candidate 's score should be substantially higher than the runner-up. After softmax with the training temperature, your output should look near-one-hot in clear-cut situations –- not a smoothly graded distribution. A decisive winner gap matters more than carefully shaping the long tail. 2. **Top-1 is what matters; top-2 is a soft backup; the rest is irrelevant.** Don 't waste complexity on shaping the bottom of the distribution. A simple "score = -distance + lookahead_bonus" can outperform an 8-signal weighted mixture if the simpler one consistently picks the right top-1. Heuristics are evaluated on: (a) whether their argmax matches the teacher 's argmax (primary) (b) whether their top-2 contains the teacher 's argmax (secondary) The full distribution shape does not matter. Avoid over-engineering for it. 

I.3 Phase I — initial proposal I.3.1 Propose — _make_idea_prompt (system) Propose strategy (system) 

You are an expert in the 2D symmetric Euclidean Travelling Salesman Problem. Training is on {problem_size}-city instances, but the heuristic must generalise to any subgraph size K in [1, {problem_size - 1}] because it is called repeatedly during decoding on a shrinking unvisited set. 

21 {_SPARSE_TEACHER_CONTEXT} Describe ONE strategy for choosing the next city at each decoding step (1-3 sentences). Focus on a strategy that produces a CLEAR top-1 winner from the candidates, not one that ranks many of them similarly. Top-1 hit rate is the primary metric. The strategy must rely only on (unselected_locs, first_loc, current_loc). There is NO global "visited mask" or full-instance node list available –- visited nodes are not in the input. Progress within the tour is exposed ONLY via K = unselected_locs.size(1). No step index or step_norm is provided. Diversity guideline: Avoid proposing a strategy that is functionally identical to an existing one. - You may reuse existing features as secondary signals, as long as the overall combination or decision logic is meaningfully new. - Simpler strategies with one or two strong signals are preferred over complex multi-signal blends. Use only TSP reasoning; do not mention VRP concepts. Do NOT write code or mathematical formulas. 

I.3.2 Implement — _make_system_prompt (system) Implement strategy (system) 

You are writing heuristic modules for the 2D symmetric Euclidean Travelling Salesman Problem (TSP). Training is on {problem_size}-city instances, but at inference time K (the number of unvisited candidate cities at each decoding step) varies from {problem_size - 1} down to 1. Your code MUST work for ANY K. {_SPARSE_TEACHER_CONTEXT} Your task is to write a Python module containing exactly one function: def heuristic(unselected_locs, first_loc, current_loc) -> torch.Tensor: """Score each unvisited candidate. Args: unselected_locs: torch.Tensor [B, K, 2] candidate (x,y) coords in [0,1]^2 first_loc: torch.Tensor [B, 2] start node coords current_loc: torch.Tensor [B, 2] current end-of-tour coords Returns: torch.Tensor [B, K] finite scores; higher = more preferred next-node. """ Rules: - Imports allowed: torch, torch.nn.functional as F, math. Nothing else. - All tensor operations must be batched (first dim = B). K may differ across calls. - No Python `for ` loops over batch dim or candidate dim. No `while ` loops. No itertools. All ops must be vectorised torch ops. - No file I/O, network access, environment access, printing, or side effects. - Do not modify input tensors in-place. - Coordinates are in [0,1]^2. Embed any constants directly in code. - No PARAMS dict required. **Critical: K=1 edge case.** Your code WILL be called with K=1 at the last decoding step. Common K=1 pitfalls that produce NaN/inf and cause your heuristic to be discarded: - `tensor.std(dim=K_dim) ` defaults to `unbiased=True ` which needs >=2 samples; at K=1 it returns NaN. Use `tensor.std(dim=K_dim, unbiased=False) ` or just skip dispersion calcs when K==1. 

22 - `tensor.var(dim=K_dim) ` has the same default-unbiased issue. Use 

`var(dim=K_dim, unbiased=False) `.- Dividing by `K - 1 `, `(K * (K - 1)) `, or `count - 1 ` blows up at K=1. Use 

`max(K - 1, 1) ` or add a `+ 1e-8 ` denominator guard. - Pairwise distance matrices [B, K, K] degenerate to [B, 1, 1] with the only entry being self-distance 0; downstream divisions or normalisations on this can NaN. - When K=1, the answer is forced (one candidate); your code can early-return 

`torch.zeros(B, 1, ...) ` if any computation would be degenerate. Return a torch.Tensor of shape [B, K] with finite scores. Return ONLY the complete Python module, no explanation, no markdown fences. 

I.3.3 Implement — user message + module template Implement strategy (user) + HEURISTIC_MODULE_TEMPLATE 

Implement the following heuristic strategy as a Python module. Strategy: {description} Use this structure: import torch import torch.nn.functional as F import math def heuristic(unselected_locs, first_loc, current_loc): """Score each unvisited candidate. Args: unselected_locs: torch.Tensor [B, K, 2] first_loc: torch.Tensor [B, 2] current_loc: torch.Tensor [B, 2] Returns: torch.Tensor [B, K] of finite scores; higher = preferred next-node. Note: progress within the tour is exposed only implicitly via K = unselected_locs.size(1). No global N or step index is provided. """ # TODO: Replace with strategy implementation. raise NotImplementedError 

I.4 Phase II — TextGrad refinement loop I.4.1 Backward (code) — _make_backward_prompt (system) Backward on code (system) 

You are the BACKWARD PASS of a TextGrad optimizer for TSP next-node selection heuristics. Training was on {problem_size}-city instances; K (candidate count) varies at inference. {_SPARSE_TEACHER_CONTEXT} The heuristic uses signature heuristic(unselected_locs [B,K,2], first_loc [B,2], current_loc [B,2]) -> [B,K] You will see a heuristic function and one decision step where it picked a different top-1 from the teacher. Produce a TEXT GRADIENT: a concise diagnosis of why the code 'sscore for the teacher 's top-1 candidate fell behind its (wrong) argmax. This is NOT a code fix. Output only a diagnosis in this exact format: 

23 LOGIC: [what the code currently computes for ranking these top candidates] TEACHER: [the teacher chose candidate X with ~95% mass –- what about X would the code recognize?] FLAW: [why the code 's score for X fell below the score for the (wrong) argmax] DIRECTION: [what change would push X 's score above the wrong argmax –- focus on making the winning gap larger or fixing the tiebreaker, NOT on shaping the full distribution] Be concrete about geometry (distances, angles, tour-closing cost, cluster structure). 2-5 sentences total. No code. Note that K varies –- your reasoning must hold for any K. 

I.4.2 Backward (code) — per-failure user message Backward on code (per-failure user message) 

Heuristic code: {code} Failure case [KL(teacher||heuristic)={kl_val:.4f}]:{rank_line} Step: {int(step)}/{int(step_max)} ({100*int(step)//int(step_max)}% complete) Unvisited candidates remaining (K): {n_unv} Current position: {cur_pos} Tour-start position: {first_pos} 5 nearest unvisited (geometry only): {[f"pos={x[ 'pos ']} d={x[ 'dist_to_cur ']}" for x in nu ]} Heuristic top-2: {h3} Teacher top-2: {t3} Generate the text gradient for this failure case. Focus especially on why the heuristic 's top-ranked candidate differs from the teacher 's, described purely in geometric terms (positions, distances, angles). Candidates have NO stable identifier –- your reasoning must be over geometry, not node ids. 

I.4.3 Backward (description) — _make_backward_desc_prompt (system) Backward on description (system) 

You are the BACKWARD PASS of a TextGrad optimizer for TSP heuristic descriptions. Training was on {problem_size}-city instances; the description must remain valid for any K. {_SPARSE_TEACHER_CONTEXT} Given a heuristic 's natural language description and a decision step where the heuristic picked the wrong top-1, produce a TEXT GRADIENT: what does the description fail to capture that would help the implementation pick the right top-1 next time? Format: MISSING: [what geometric reasoning the description omits or under-emphasises] MISLEADING: [anything in the description that points the implementation in the wrong direction] DIRECTION: [how the description should be revised –- focus on the top-1 ranking decision, not on shaping a full distribution] 2-4 sentences. No code. Focus on strategy-level geometric reasoning that affects top-1. 

I.4.4 Backward (description) — per-failure user message Backward on description (per-failure user message) 

Heuristic description: "{description}" Heuristic code: 

24 {code} Failure case [KL={kl_val:.4f}]: Step: {int(step)}/{int(step_max)} ({100*int(step)//int(step_max)}% complete) Current pos: {sample_info.get( 'cur_pos ', '?')} Heuristic top-2 (geometry only): {h3} Teacher top-2 (geometry only): {t3} Generate the text gradient for the DESCRIPTION (not the code). Reason in geometric terms only –- candidates have no stable identifier. 

I.4.5 Optimizer step — _make_optimizer_prompt (system) Optimizer step (system) 

You are part of an optimization system that improves Python heuristic functions for TSP next-node selection. Training was on {problem_size}-city instances; K (candidate count) varies from {problem_size - 1} down to 1 at inference time. {_SPARSE_TEACHER_CONTEXT} Heuristic signature is fixed: heuristic(unselected_locs [B,K,2], first_loc [B,2], current_loc [B,2]) -> [B,K] You will receive the current heuristic code and text gradients (diagnoses of failure cases). Your task: synthesize the gradients and produce an improved version of the code that picks the teacher 's top-1 candidate more often (and at least keeps it in the top-2 when it can 'twin). - Address the most common and severe failure patterns across all gradients - Momentum gradients indicate persistent failure modes –- treat them as high priority - **Sharpen the winning gap.** If the existing code outputs scores that are too close together at the top, increase the multiplier on the dominant signal so the winner pulls ahead more decisively after softmax. - Keep the function signature unchanged. - Imports: torch, torch.nn.functional as F, math only. - Hard constraint: NO Python `for ` loops over batch dim or candidate dim. NO `while ` loops. All ops must be vectorised torch ops. - Code must work for ANY K (do not assume K = {problem_size - 1}). - **K=1 numerical safety**: `tensor.std/var(dim, unbiased=True) ` returns NaN at K=1. Always pass `unbiased=False ` when reducing along the K dimension. Avoid dividing by `K-1 ` or `K*(K-1) ` without guarding ( `max(K-1, 1) ` or `+ 1e-8 `). Early-return 

`torch.zeros(B, 1, ...) ` when K==1 if any computation would be degenerate. - Embed constants directly in code. No markdown fences. - Prefer simplicity. A 5-line scorer that picks top-1 right is better than a 50-line multi-signal blend that only gets top-3 right. Put the improved Python module between {new_variable_start_tag} and {new_variable_end_tag}. 

25 J Imitation Analysis 

In this appendix, we demonstrate that the solutions obtained by the black-box teacher model and the interpretable student model are highly similar. Using TSP as the most intuitive example, we first report their statistical similarity in Table 5, and further illustrate this with instances of different sizes, each solved by POMO/LEHD, in Figures 8–10. Table 5: Undirected edge overlap (mean ± std ) between teacher and student tours Pair greedy search POMO TSP-50 81 .0 ± 9.3% 92 .2 ± 8.4% 

POMO TSP-100 78 .9 ± 6.6% 86 .6 ± 7.1% 

LEHD TSP-100 79 .5 ± 6.2% 91 .7 ± 6.7% 

Figure 8: POMO-TSP-50 Teacher-Student Comparison 26 Figure 9: POMO-TSP-100 Teacher-Student Comparison 27 Figure 10: LEHD-TSP-100 Teacher-Student Comparison 28 K Heuristic Gallery 5

In this appendix, we present the heuristics distilled from POMO (TSP-50/100, CVRP-50/100) and LEHD (TSP-100, CVRP-100). Table 6: TSP-50 heuristic bank distilled from POMO teacher. 

Heuristic ID Description 

H00 A nearest-neighbor heuristic that adds an early isolation bonus, a late start-proximity pull, and switches under few remaining nodes to a two- or three-step closure-lookahead approximation. H01 A nearest-neighbor heuristic that increasingly favors far-from-start candidates in late stages, then applies a very-late finish-cost penalty based on current-to-candidate plus candidate-to-start distance. H02 A thresholded hull-sweep heuristic whose active TSP-50 behavior starts with reduced hull and proximity terms, becomes proximity-dominant later, and uses two-step cost plus outlier bonuses in the endgame. H03 A nearest-neighbor heuristic with phase-gated hull and far-from-start bonuses, a brief late pull toward the start, and a final strong preference for far-from-start nodes before return. H04 A two-phase isolation-regret heuristic that favors nearby nodes with large second-minus-nearest neighbor gaps, then switches at eight or fewer nodes to a six-step greedy-chain subtour estimate with strong proximity sharpening. H05 A count-adaptive lookahead heuristic that rewards peripheral and isolated far-from-start nodes when few remain, uses one- and two-step completion costs, and directly scores one- or two-node endgames. H06 A phase-adaptive closure-lookahead heuristic that favors close candidates with cheap onward neighbors early, adds a consistent far-from-start bonus, and switches late to two-step, three-node, or direct two-node closure scoring. H07 A nearest-neighbor heuristic with an early and mid-tour heading-alignment bonus among top-nearest candidates, then shifts late toward minimizing current-to-candidate plus candidate-to-start closing cost. H08 An outlier-aware heuristic that combines proximity with centroid-based geometric outlier urgency early, blends into current-plus-start distance minimization late, and uses greedy-chain completion cost for ten or fewer nodes. H09 A phase-blended geometric heuristic that rewards proximity, dense angular sectors, and hullness early, emphasizes isolation later, and uses one- or two-step closure lookahead while saving start-near nodes for last. H10 A postponement-regret heuristic that scores candidates by negative current distance plus a progress-scaled bonus for large nearest-unvisited-neighbor distance, increasingly prioritizing locally isolated cities. H11 A nearest-neighbor heuristic with a mid-tour inward sweep bonus toward the unvisited centroid, scaled by centroid displacement, and a late bonus for far-from-start candidates. H12 A progress-balanced heuristic combining strong proximity, a start-distance term that shifts from early far-start penalty to late far-start bonus, late two-step lookahead, and early centroid-direction guidance. H13 A normalized closing-cost heuristic that combines nearest-neighbor distance with early momentum, sparse-density, and centroid-closeness signals, then transitions near the end to pure current-to-candidate-to-start minimization. 

> 5

To conserve space, this appendix reports condensed natural-language summaries in place of the heuristics’ source description/code. Each summary is produced by prompting a large language model to refine the description obtained during heuristic discovery into a single concise sentence and to re-check it for consistency against the heuristic’s executable code, which remains the ground truth. 

29 Table 7: TSP-100 heuristic bank distilled from POMO teacher. 

Heuristic ID Description 

H00 A nearest-neighbor heuristic that adds an early isolation bonus, a late start-proximity pull, and switches under few remaining nodes to a two- or three-step lookahead approximation for closing the tour. H01 A nearest-neighbor heuristic that increasingly favors far-from-start candidates as the tour becomes late, then applies a very-late finish-cost penalty based on current-to-candidate plus candidate-to-start distance. H02 A four-regime hull-sweep heuristic that rewards centroid-far peripheral candidates early, becomes proximity-dominant in mid and late stages, and uses two-step cost plus outlier bonuses in the endgame. H03 A nearest-neighbor heuristic with phase-gated hull and far-from-start bonuses, a brief late penalty for being far from the start, and a final strong preference for far-from-start nodes before return. H04 A two-phase isolation-regret heuristic that favors nearby nodes with large second-minus-nearest neighbor gaps, then switches at eight or fewer nodes to a six-step greedy-chain subtour estimate with strong proximity sharpening. H05 A count-adaptive lookahead heuristic that rewards peripheral and isolated far-from-start nodes when few remain, uses one- and two-step completion costs, and directly scores one- or two-node endgames. H06 A phase-adaptive lookahead heuristic that favors close candidates with cheap onward neighbors early, adds a consistent far-from-start bonus, and switches late to two-step, three-node, or direct two-node closure scoring. H07 A nearest-neighbor heuristic with an early and mid-tour angular-heading bonus among top-nearest candidates, then shifts late toward minimizing current-to-candidate plus candidate-to-start closing cost. H08 An outlier-aware heuristic that combines proximity with centroid-based outlier urgency early, blends into current-plus-start distance minimization late, and uses greedy-chain completion cost for ten or fewer nodes. H09 A phase-blended geometric heuristic that rewards proximity, dense angular sectors, and hullness early, emphasizes isolation later, and uses one- or two-step closure lookahead while saving start-near nodes for last. H10 A postponement-regret heuristic that scores candidates by negative current distance plus a progress-scaled bonus for having a distant nearest unvisited neighbor, prioritizing locally isolated cities increasingly late. H11 A nearest-neighbor heuristic with a mid-tour inward sweep bonus toward the unvisited centroid, scaled by centroid displacement, and a late bonus for far-from-start candidates. H12 A progress-balanced heuristic combining strong proximity, a depot-distance term that changes from early far-start penalty to late far-start bonus, late two-step lookahead, and early centroid-direction guidance. H13 A normalized closing-cost heuristic that combines nearest-neighbor distance with early momentum, sparse-density, and centroid-closeness signals, then transitions near the end to pure current-to-candidate-to-start minimization. 

30 Table 8: TSP-100 heuristic bank distilled from LEHD teacher. 

Heuristic ID Description 

H00 A short-step-dominant heuristic that strongly favors nearby cities, adds extra bonuses for tiny edges and top-two nearest candidates, penalizes locally isolated candidates, and mildly favors start-near candidates more strongly when few nodes remain. H01 A coupled two-step closure heuristic that scores each candidate by the current-to-candidate cost plus the best follow-up node, jointly accounting for the follow-up edge and its distance back to the start. H02 An insertion-cost heuristic that favors candidates with low current-to-candidate-to-start splice cost, augmented by a best-next-node lookahead whose weight increases as the remaining set becomes smaller. H03 A nearest-neighbor heuristic with mild outward-sweep directionality, two-step closure lookahead, late-stage outlier and leaf-node bonuses, and a penalty for selecting the start-nearest node too early. H04 A nearest-dominant chain-and-close heuristic that adds small-K two-step closure pressure, penalizes candidates far from the start, and only gates the inward-turn alignment bonus to near-best immediate moves. H05 A tangential-sweep heuristic that strongly favors short steps, preserves sweep direction around the remaining cluster, penalizes inward collapse, rewards peripheral and isolated nodes, and shifts from away-from-start to toward-start behavior near closure. H06 A locally scaled proximity heuristic that balances short current-step cost with isolation, partner-gap, hullness, forward-heading continuity, back-turn penalties, short-edge bonuses, and a mild away-from-start bias. H07 A start-aware lookahead heuristic that mainly favors short moves, prefers leaving the start-nearest remaining node for the final return, and adds an outward-ring bonus when the remaining set has radial spread. H08 A dense-side perpendicular-step heuristic that estimates the denser side around the current heading and, among candidates within a local detour cap of the nearest city, favors stepping perpendicularly into that side. H09 A forward-angular-gap heuristic that locates the largest empty sector in the forward half-plane, favors candidates near that sector center, penalizes backward turns, and adds a small frontier-reaching distance bonus inside the sector. H10 A pocket-cleaning heuristic that compares sparse forward-cone options with dense or start-shortening backward-wedge options, switching decisively to the nearest backward candidate when a rear pocket should be cleared. 

31 Table 9: CVRP-50 heuristic bank distilled from POMO teacher. 

Heuristic ID Description 

H00 A proximity-dominant capacity heuristic that favors nearby customers with good demand fit, penalizes wasted or stranded remaining load, and increasingly promotes depot return under low load. H01 A load-aware hybrid heuristic that favors nearby, angularly coherent, high-saving, low-demand customers under sufficient capacity, and switches to visit-plus-return cost minimization near capacity exhaustion. H02 A savings–proximity heuristic that favors nearby high-saving customers with tight capacity fit, while adjusting depot-return preference based on the centroid of remaining customers. H03 A sparse-sector savings heuristic that favors high Clarke–Wright-savings customers while penalizing candidates embedded in dense angular demand neighborhoods. H04 A sector-aware outward-sweeping heuristic that combines savings, proximity, capacity fit, same-sector coherence, and isolation bonuses, with proactive depot return for cross-sector pivots. H05 A capacity-adaptive route-continuation heuristic that balances Clarke–Wright savings, proximity, demand-aware proximity, and angular sweep while discouraging premature depot return. H06 A load-scaled arc-cost heuristic that favors low current-to-candidate-to-depot cost, with exact-fit and angular-coherence bonuses under sufficient load. H07 A frontier-sweeping heuristic that favors customers close to the current position but far from the remaining-customer centroid, using demand-fit bonuses to exploit remaining capacity. H08 A savings-and-angular-coherence heuristic that favors high-saving, directionally coherent, exact-fit customers, but shifts toward nearby low-demand customers under low load. H09 A compact route-continuation heuristic that prioritizes low-detour customers lying on the way back to the depot, with demand fit as a secondary signal. H10 A future-trip-avoidance heuristic that prioritizes high-demand, depot-distant customers when remaining load is large and they are cheap to reach from the current node. H11 A compact route-building heuristic that favors nearby, high-saving, directionally aligned customers under ample load, with a last-stop return-cost fallback. H12 A clustered-route heuristic that combines savings, proximity, angular-sector coherence, and tight capacity fit, switching to depot-return behavior under low-load or capacity-exhaustion signals. H13 A proximity-first return-aware heuristic that favors nearby customers, boosts depot return when nearly empty, and avoids leaving farther same-sector feasible customers behind. H14 A nearest-feasible-customer heuristic with capacity-fit refinement, adding angular and isolation bonuses only under ample load and suppressing depot return when feasible customers remain. H15 A savings-based route-continuation heuristic that favors high Clarke–Wright-savings customers under normal load and switches to round-trip cost minimization under low load. H16 A homeward straight-line corridor heuristic that favors customers on or near the current-to-depot return line and promotes depot return under low load. H17 A dense-sector sweeping heuristic that combines savings, proximity, angular demand clustering, and can-sweep capacity logic, with end-of-route proximity fallback. 

32 Table 10: CVRP-100 heuristic bank distilled from POMO teacher (1/2). 

Heuristic ID Description 

H00 A terminal-regime demand-fit heuristic that emphasizes snug exact-fill bonuses and same-arm angular alignment with outward-contour curvature, boosting inward movement under low load or awkward residual capacity. H01 A myopic local-continuation heuristic with sharp distance decay and endgame sector anchoring, distinguishing nearest-seed depot initialization from mid-route capacity-fit preference, returning to depot as feasible customers diminish. H02 An outward-sweep sector heuristic favoring radial progression and short legs, switching in a one-stop regime to exact-fit dominance and clean depot returns unless a strongly aligned final-touch corridor customer exists. H03 A Clarke–Wright savings heuristic with one-step continuation lookahead that switches between depot-start nearest-seed selection and mid-route high-savings short detours, adding cleanup penalties under a low-load, few-customer endgame. H04 A cluster-density sweep-continuation heuristic that seeds by nearest distance with a density tie-break and sweeps via local alignment and outward radial gain, suppressing depot return until no cheap-fit cleanup remains. H05 A return-corridor heuristic emphasizing inward progress and customers on the direct path home with demand–capacity exhaustion signals, applying multi-signal depot-return pressure tempered only by a strong on-corridor exhaustion candidate. H06 A proximity-dominated route-continuation heuristic with load-dependent capacity-fit signals and angular sector coherence around the first customer, promoting depot return under exhaustion, poor continuations, or distant candidates. H07 A multi-signal savings heuristic blending restart, arm, and isolated-angle strategies with load-regime switching that balances outward exploration at high load against inward cleanup at low load. H08 A sparse-sector savings heuristic favoring customers with high angular-isolation gaps and boundary arm positions, with demand-fit and successor-reachability signals sharpened under full-load initialization. H09 A radial-regime heuristic separating outward route-building (high load, favoring farther nodes) from inward returning (low load, favoring closer cleaner nodes), with strong locality and demand-fit bias. H10 A push-forward heuristic prioritizing angular coherence with the first customer and outward radial movement early, switching to inward cleanup with small-demand and near-exact-fit preference under low load. H11 A local-score heuristic combining inward-movement preference, same-arm angular coherence, and load-dependent bonuses for continuation quality and demand exactness, penalizing overfill and depot-hugging. H12 A multi-mode capacity heuristic blending depot-centered angular alignment with load switches: high load favors radial savings, low load triggers inward drift with depot-proximity incentives, and start-mode seeds along the first-node direction. H13 A wedge-continuation heuristic prioritizing same-spoke customers via tight angular alignment and close-proximity chaining, with downstream-feasibility checks validating wedge sustainability under remaining load. H14 A Clarke–Wright savings heuristic weighted by load regime: high load emphasizes savings and radial distance, low load shifts to inward alignment and return-readiness, with start-mode radial-distance seeding. H15 A multi-phase sector heuristic cycling through departure (outward sweep), mid-route (path continuation), and last-fit (exact-demand packing) phases, blended by load state and feasibility counts with one-step pairability forecasting. H16 A neighborhood-aggregation heuristic favoring dense-demand clusters via Gaussian-weighted local mass, with depot-endgame bonuses for nearest inner-aligned customers and load-tight continuation under shrinking residual demand. H17 A multi-stage route heuristic using soft-neighbor aggregation and phase selection: seed-mode emphasizes first-node alignment, route-mode balances wedge continuation with inward progress, and near-depot mode triggers exact-fit opportunism. 

33 Table 11: CVRP-100 heuristic bank distilled from POMO teacher (2/2). 

Heuristic ID Description 

H18 A proximity-dominant capacity heuristic combining Clarke–Wright savings with context-adaptive radial alignment and a residual demand-fit penalty, suppressing distance weighting under tight endgame regimes. H19 A route-continuation heuristic favoring same-arm smooth progress and savings under normal load, switching to a depot fresh-start regime that emphasizes angular frontier customers during endgame cleanup. H20 An angular forward-window coherence heuristic with radial ladder-band consistency and lookahead feasibility signals penalizing isolated customers, with low-load sigmoid-gated depot return. H21 A multistage load-dependent heuristic with base proximity and savings, high-load outward expansion versus low-load inward return with exact-fit matching, and an ultra-low cleanup regime prioritizing demand exactness. H22 A load-gated route-continuation heuristic with fuzzy tiny-load cleanup gates, inward-progress and same-arm radial weighting, demand-based sigmoid gates, and depot return conditioned on feasibility and minimum unserved demand. H23 A dense two-step lookahead heuristic with pair-distance cost analysis and winner-tied endgame amplification, emphasizing demand-fit exactness across tiny, two-node, and three-node cleanup regimes. H24 A multiplex-weighted capacity heuristic with regime-specific bonuses triggered by load and feasibility, favoring exact demand fits and angular arm coherence with distinct depot-return strategies for moderate versus minimal remaining capacity. H25 A sparse angular-sliced heuristic decoupling start, pivot, and finish phases via location gating, emphasizing outward moderate-range expansion at the depot and inward cluster closing, with early return under low load. H26 A sweep-arm-coherent heuristic with load-dependent launch, continue, and endgame regimes that prioritize same-heading and same-arm consistency, using isolation metrics to break ties and intensifying depot return as feasible customers decrease. H27 A savings-and-arm-alignment dominant heuristic with load-sensitive regime switching (exact-fill, low-load, general) that emphasizes lateral alignment and termination-weighted depot preference when few customers remain. H28 A hierarchical pairwise-lookahead heuristic using gap-based dispersion and fit-quality scores, gating start behavior at full load and alternating between exact-fit and near-exact finish modes under low capacity. H29 A load-stratified route heuristic combining radial outward bonuses at high load with cluster-finishing support at low load, using pairwise fit lookahead and local-density suppression to modulate early return. H30 A multi-regime routing heuristic prioritizing proximity and Clarke–Wright savings with demand-fit and cluster-support signals, switching to remote-gap exploration under scarce capacity via sharply gated load regimes. H31 A capacity-constrained route builder combining travel cost, arm-coherence geometry, and capacity fit, suppressing regular geometry under tiny load and switching between near-depot and outward cleanup modes. H32 A projection-based arm-continuation heuristic using radial and lateral alignment to on-slice candidates with multi-scale demand-fit penalties, load-dependent regime switching, and specialized start-phase scoring for arm-aligned mid-radius customers. H33 An angular-density arm-launch heuristic with strong local preference and an arm-alignment base plus dual state-driven bonuses for high-load pivot and tiny-load finish phases, with sharpened customer logits. H34 A savings-dominant multi-regime heuristic with adaptive bundle-size targeting scaled by load phase, outward/inward radial switching, and micro-cone tie-breaking via heading-error reranking near the nearest customer. H35 A phase-adaptive heuristic with load-state regime switching: high-load routes favor outward radial expansion with larger demand targets, while low-load routes emphasize inward pulls and exact-fit preference for a clean finish. 

34 Table 12: CVRP-100 heuristic bank distilled from an LEHD teacher (1/2). 

Heuristic ID Description 

H00 A demand-fit and savings heuristic that combines Clarke–Wright savings with proximity and capacity fit, and increasingly promotes depot return as the remaining load nears exhaustion. H01 A soft-temperature savings heuristic that normalizes Clarke–Wright savings by the feasible-customer spread, gating depot return on the remaining-customer centroid geometry and negative savings. H02 An angular-coherence heuristic favoring customers aligned with the current route direction, weighted by proximity and Clarke–Wright savings, with depot return under low load, scattered demand, or negative savings. H03 A savings-dominant heuristic that heavily weights Clarke–Wright savings over inverse-distance proximity and suppresses depot return until the remaining load nears zero or no feasible customers remain. H04 A normalized proximity-and-savings heuristic with load-adaptive weighting (proximity stronger at high load) that returns to the depot when load is low or the vehicle is farther from the depot than the average feasible customer. H05 A route-continuation heuristic scoring customers on Clarke–Wright savings, depot-direction alignment, and demand flexibility, suppressing low-load depot bonuses when a cheaper nearby customer exists, else forcing return under very low load. H06 An angular-arm heuristic favoring same-sector customers via demand-weighted proximity and Clarke–Wright savings, triggering depot return under wide angular spread, high average demand, or low load. H07 A heading-aligned savings heuristic with problem-size-adaptive weights that favors customers matching the current direction and snugly fitting remaining load, returning to depot under low load, angular spread, or weak savings. H08 A forward-sector continuation heuristic combining Clarke–Wright savings, heading alignment, proximity, and demand efficiency, triggering depot return when the forward cone is exhausted or feasible demand exceeds remaining load. H09 An adaptive-sweep heuristic that picks a clockwise or counter-clockwise rotation from feasible-customer angular gaps and favors close, high-savings customers within the swept angle, returning to depot under low load or angular exhaustion. H10 An angular-cone heuristic with sharpened cosine alignment that strongly prefers customers in the forward cone, using demand fit and distance as secondary signals with a load-taper depot trigger. H11 A balanced angular-proximity heuristic with a bell-shaped demand-fill score and Clarke–Wright savings, returning to depot via an arm-pivot trigger when the nearest feasible customer is angularly distant or demand overflows capacity. H12 A sector-coherence heuristic favoring near-depot, angularly aligned customers with good demand fit, increasingly promoting depot return under low load, angular fragmentation, or infeasibility. H13 A regret-isolation heuristic that prioritizes otherwise-stranded isolated customers blended with mild Clarke–Wright savings and proximity, returning to depot under low load or when total demand far exceeds remaining capacity. H14 A Clarke–Wright proximity heuristic that penalizes depot-distant and arm-deepening detours, promoting return when the vehicle is deep in an arm, far from the customer cluster, or nearly empty and distant. 

35 Table 13: CVRP-100 heuristic bank distilled from an LEHD teacher (2/2). 

Heuristic ID Description 

H15 A phase-adaptive planner with angular-isolation and demand-fit signals that seeds far arms at route start, blends proximity and savings mid-route, and prioritizes angular alignment near exhaustion. H16 An arm-initialization heuristic using sector density and angular extremity at the depot and alignment plus depot-proximity away from it, suppressing return when a feasible customer exactly fills the remaining load. H17 A spatial-isolation heuristic combining local density, Clarke–Wright savings, and angular arm-isolation, seeding far isolated arms at route start with capacity-aware depot-proximity bonuses that fade as load nears exhaustion. H18 A multi-regime heuristic blending homeward-corridor bonuses with angular arm-isolation sparsity, switching between depot-anchored sweep and load-weighted far-arm seeking based on the current position. H19 A load-tapered dual-regime heuristic favoring detour-minimizing on-path customers and demand fill at low load, smoothly transitioning to Clarke–Wright savings and proximity at high load. H20 An angular-isolation heuristic with demand-weighted sector density and depot-distance modulation that triggers depot return when the vehicle pivots beyond a narrow angular cone (arm exhaustion). H21 A demand-weighted density heuristic favoring sparse-sector customers at route start and switching to savings-dominant arm alignment during routing, with angular-gap and fill-quality depot triggers. H22 A corridor-alignment heuristic favoring customers on the current-to-depot return path, weighting alignment more strongly at low load and returning to depot under low load and poor corridor fit. H23 A softened angular-continuity heuristic with small arm-transition rewards, isolation-driven sparse-arm selection, near-depot outlier sweeping at moderate load, and load-adaptive weight scheduling. H24 A multi-regime heuristic blending Clarke–Wright savings, angular isolation, and proximity by load, switching to isolation-plus-depth seeding at the depot and savings-per-detour efficiency under very low load. H25 A load-modulated heuristic blending homeward path-cost savings, load-scaled arm density, and an arm-alignment penalty, boosting distant customers at high load and on-way-home returns at low load. H26 A proximity-and-cluster-density heuristic combining demand-weighted local clustering with Clarke–Wright savings, suppressing depot return at high load with many feasible customers and boosting it when load or feasible proximity is low. H27 A local-cluster-commitment heuristic scoring proximity, neighborhood density, heading alignment, and Clarke–Wright savings, shifting weight toward density when customers cluster locally, with depot return under very low load or detour-required customers. H28 A sharply load-regimed heuristic (arm-tip-first at high load, savings blend mid-load, proximity-dominant at low load) with angular-coherence penalties and several explicit depot-return gates near exhaustion. 

36 L Code Example 

In this appendix, we show two example codes learned by our student model; the complete set will be open-sourced together with the code. Listing 1: POMO TSP-100 H10 Code  

> 1

import torch  

> 23

def heuristic(locs, current_node, mask, visited, step_norm, first_node):  

> 4

"""  

> 5

POMO TSP-100 H10: Postponement-regret heuristic.  

> 67

Scores each feasible candidate by combining immediate proximity with  

> 8

a progress-scaled isolation bonus. As the tour progresses, the heuristic  

> 9

increasingly favors candidates whose nearest remaining neighbor is far away,  

> 10

i.e., nodes that may become expensive detours if postponed.  

> 11

"""  

> 12

B, N, _ = locs.shape  

> 13

device = locs.device  

> 14

batch_idx = torch.arange(B, device=device)  

> 15 16

# Current city location: [B, 2]  

> 17

cur_loc = locs[batch_idx, current_node]  

> 18 19

# Immediate distance from current city to each candidate: [B, N]  

> 20

dist_to_cur = torch.norm(locs - cur_loc.unsqueeze(1), dim=-1)  

> 21 22

# Pairwise distances between all cities: [B, N, N]  

> 23

pairwise_dist = torch.norm(  

> 24

locs.unsqueeze(2) - locs.unsqueeze(1),  

> 25

dim=-1  

> 26

) 

> 27 28

# For each candidate i, find distance to its nearest other unvisited city.  

> 29

eye = torch.eye(N, device=device, dtype=torch.bool).unsqueeze(0)  

> 30

invalid_neighbor = (~mask).unsqueeze(1) | eye  

> 31

masked_pairwise = pairwise_dist.masked_fill(invalid_neighbor, 1e9)  

> 32

nearest_unvisited_dist = masked_pairwise.min(dim=-1).values  

> 33 34

# Progress-scaled postponement-regret weight.  

> 35

alpha = (1.5 + 2.0 * step_norm).unsqueeze(-1)  

> 36 37

# Higher is better: nearby nodes are good, but isolated nodes become  

> 38

# increasingly urgent as the tour progresses.  

> 39

logits = -dist_to_cur + alpha * nearest_unvisited_dist  

> 40 41

# Stand-alone safety: remove infeasible / already visited nodes.  

> 42

logits = logits.masked_fill(~mask, -1e9)  

> 43 44

return logits 

37 Listing 2: LEHD TSP-100 H1 Code  

> 1

import torch  

> 23

import math  

> 4

import torch  

> 56

def heuristic(unselected_locs, first_loc, current_loc):  

> 7

"""  

> 8

LEHD TSP-100 H01: Coupled two-step closure lookahead.  

> 910

Scores each remaining city by combining the immediate current-to-candidate  

> 11

distance with the cheapest follow-up move from that candidate, where the  

> 12

follow-up node is also encouraged to be close to the tour start. This gives  

> 13

a local geometric correction rule that favors candidates forming a good  

> 14

two-step chain toward closure.  

> 15

"""  

> 16

B, K, _ = unselected_locs.shape  

> 17

device = unselected_locs.device  

> 18

dtype = unselected_locs.dtype  

> 19 20

# K=1: forced choice.  

> 21

if K == 1:  

> 22

return torch.zeros(B, 1, device=device, dtype=dtype)  

> 23 24

# Distance from current city to each candidate: d(current, i)  

> 25

dist_current = torch.norm(  

> 26

unselected_locs - current_loc.unsqueeze(1),  

> 27

dim=-1  

> 28

) # [B, K]  

> 29 30

# Distance from each candidate to the start city: d(i, start)  

> 31

dist_start = torch.norm(  

> 32

unselected_locs - first_loc.unsqueeze(1),  

> 33

dim=-1  

> 34

) # [B, K]  

> 35 36

# Pairwise distances among remaining candidates: d(i, j)  

> 37

pairwise_dist = torch.cdist(unselected_locs, unselected_locs, p=2)  

> 38

eye = torch.eye(K, device=device, dtype=torch.bool).unsqueeze(0)  

> 39

pairwise_dist = pairwise_dist.masked_fill(eye, float("inf"))  

> 40 41

# K-aware closure weight: stronger when fewer nodes remain.  

> 42

sqrtK = math.sqrt(float(K))  

> 43

lam = min(1.0, 1.6 / sqrtK)  

> 44

w_step = 1.0 + 0.3 / sqrtK  

> 45 46

# Exact two-node tail behavior.  

> 47

if K == 2:  

> 48

lam = 1.0  

> 49

w_step = 1.0  

> 50 51

lam = torch.tensor(lam, device=device, dtype=dtype)  

> 52

w_step = torch.tensor(w_step, device=device, dtype=dtype)  

> 53

scale = torch.tensor(22.0 + 6.0 / sqrtK, device=device, dtype=dtype)  

> 54 55

# For each candidate i, choose the best follow-up j:  

> 56

# min_j [ d(i,j) + lambda * d(j,start) ], j != i.  

> 57

followup_cost = pairwise_dist + lam * dist_start.unsqueeze(1)  

> 58

best_followup = followup_cost.min(dim=2).values # [B, K]  

> 59 60

# Lower cost is better, so return negative cost as score.  

> 61

total_cost = w_step * dist_current + best_followup  

> 62

scores = -scale * total_cost  

> 63 64

return scores 

38 M License 

Our experiments use publicly available checkpoints and code assets from prior neural combinatorial optimization models, including POMO [ 2] and LEHD [ 3], as teacher policies and/or baselines. For POMO, we use the publicly released repository associated with the NeurIPS 2020 paper. We did not find an explicit license file or named software license in the public repository, and therefore use the checkpoint only for academic research comparison and policy distillation. We do not redistribute the original or modified POMO checkpoints. For LEHD, we use the publicly released repository associated with the NeurIPS 2023 paper. The repository states that the code is copyrighted by CIAM Group and can only be used for non-commercial purposes; commercial use requires contacting the authors. We use the LEHD checkpoint only for non-commercial academic research, follow the stated usage restriction, and do not redistribute the original or modified LEHD checkpoints. 

## N Code Public Statement 

Code and Checkpoint Availability. To support reproducibility, we will make our source code, trained checkpoints, configuration files, and evaluation scripts publicly available upon publication. 39