Title: 2607.04156v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04156v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 02:03:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 119

Markdown Content:
Language models guide symbolic equation discovery by controlling search 

Zikai Xie 1,2,†, *, Wenmei Li 1,†, Man Luo 1, Jun Jiang 1,2, * and Linjiang Chen 1,2 ,3, * 

> 1

State  Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, Hefei National Research Center for Physical 

Sciences at the Microscale, School of Chemistry and Materials Science, University of Science and Technology 

of China, Hefei, China.  

> 2

Center for Scientific Intelligence Innovation, Hefei, China  

> 3

School of Chemistry, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK  

> †

These authors contributed equally: Zikai Xie,  Wenmei Li 

* Corresponding authors : linjiangchen@ustc.edu.cn , jiangj1@ustc.edu.cn,  zikaix@ustc.edu.cn 

# Abstract 

Scientific equation discovery must combine broad domain priors with strict numerical  testing. Symbolic 

regression supplies numerical grounding but faces a combinatorial search space, whereas many language -

model systems ask the model to propose or select formulas directly. We test a different division of labour. We 

compare role specifications in which the language model acts as equation author, candidate decider or search 

controller, alongside end -to -end language -model and purely numerical baselines. In the controller setting  we 

propose here , implemented as LLM -PySR, language models specify variables, operators, transformations and 

search depth;  symbolic regression  enumerates and fits expressions; and deterministic metrics govern retention. 

Across 74 AI -Feynman equations and seven complex formula -recovery tasks, search control achieved the 

strongest observed balance of accuracy, complexity, stability and cost. On an independent battery dataset, 

LLM -PySR identified a compact piecewise -linear relation between early voltage -curve displacement and cycle 

life. The results suggest that language models should shape hypothesis exploration rather than decide which 

equations survive. 

# Main 

Inferring compact, mechanistically meaningful equations from data has long been a hallmark of scientific 

discovery, and is also a central goal of scientific  machine learning. 1 Unlike conventional machine -learning 

models that primarily optimize predictive accuracy, scientific equation discovery seeks compact analytical 

relations that can be inspected, tested and connected to mechanism. 2 Symbolic regression (SR) is one of the 

main approaches to this problem: it searches over variables, operators and constants to identify closed -form 

expressions that explain observed data. This makes SR especially attractive in physics, chemistry, materials 

science and engineering, where an explicit formula can provide insight beyond numerical prediction. 3–7

However, the same flexibility that makes SR powerful also makes it difficult: the space of possible expressions 

grows rapidly with the number of variables, operators and allowed expression  computation  complexity. 8

Recent large -language -model (LLM) based SR methods have improved equation discovery by injecting 

scientific priors, semantic information and code -generation ability into the search process .9–12  Compared with 

traditional search -based approaches, th ese  approach es  provide a hybrid mechanism that couples semantic 

reasoning with symbolic search. 13 –18  A common strategy is agentification: to prompt an LLM with data 

summaries, variable names, scientific context and previous feedback, and ask it to generate candidate equation 

skeletons, which are then numerically fitted and evaluated. 19  This paradigm has shown that LLMs can provide 

useful high -level priors for SR.  However, in such skeleton -generation pipelines, the LLM does more than 

provide priors: it effectively pre -selects the structural search space by deciding which equation forms  are 

passed to numerical fitting.  Although numerical optimization can fit constants after a skeleton is proposed, the structural search itself remains limited by the LLM ’s prompt -level interpretation of the data and context. As a 

result, direct equation generation can be expensive, because many candidate formulas require repeated LLM 

calls, and fragile, because generated skeletons may reflect memorized priors, semantic associations or 

hallucinated relationships rather than fine -grained numerical structure. 20 –22 

We argue that LLMs should guide where SR searches, not decide what equation science has discovered. LLMs 

are valuable because they provide broad scientific priors, integrate heterogeneous information, reason over 

variable semantics and  propose useful analogies. However, their weakness is that they are not inherently 

reliable numerical search engines: they can be insensitive to small residual patterns, over -rely on familiar 

scientific forms and produce plausible but poorly grounded structural suggestions.  We therefore hypothesize 

that separating the semantic and numerical roles is essential for reliable equation discovery. In this proposed 

division of  labour , t he LLM is  restricted  to control ling  the search space —selecting variables, operators, 

engineered features, transformations and expression -complexity schedules, whereas the SR engine performs 

the actual combinatorial search, constant optimizatio n. Ultimately, semantic priors shape hypothesis 

exploration, but strict numerical evidence retains authority over which equations survive. 

To systematically test this hypothesis, we evaluated five distinct role specifications for LLM -assisted equation 

discovery: equation author, candidate decider, search controller (instantiated here as LLM -PySR), full -stack 

LLM search, and no -LLM numerical search. By allocating equivalent computational budgets across physics -

derived benchmarks and complex symbolic -regression tasks, we found that the controller configuration 

provides the most  favourable  joint trade -off between predictive accuracy, expression complexity, and stability. 

Crucially, it fundamentally reduces the computational cost of AI -driven discovery: on the AI -Feynman 

benchmark, the search controller achieves state -of -the -art predictive accuracy while consuming merely 4.1% 

and 3.2% of the LLM tokens required by leading full -stack LLM  methods (LLM -SR and DrSR, 

respectively). 9,10,23  Beyond synthetic benchmarks, we demonstrated the controller's scientific utility on an 

independent lithium -ion battery dataset. 24  The system autonomously extracted a compact, piecewise -linear 

empirical law that links early voltage -curve displacement to cycle life —a finding consistent with established 

electrochemical degradation signatures. Together, these results validate that a numerically grounded division 

of  labour  provides a highly efficient, interpretability -first blueprint for the cognitive architecture of scientific 

AI agents. 

# Results 

To systematically delineate the boundaries of artificial agency, we conceptualize scientific equation discovery 

as a closed -loop system comprising three core functional blocks: search -space planning, expression 

enumeration, and candidate acceptance. By shifting the computational authority over these functions between 

LLMs and deterministic numerical procedures, we formalize a spectrum of five distinct cognitive role 

specifications (Fig. 1). 

In our proposed search controller paradigm instantiated here as the LLM -PySR framework: the LLM is strictly 

restricted to high -level search -space planning (proposing variable subsets, operators, and complexity 

constraints); the structural enumeration is left entirely to a symbolic regression engine (PySR), and final 

formula retention is governed strictly by deterministic numerical metric gates. 15  The equation author setting 

relaxes this by allowing the LLM to directly dictate mathematical skeletons while delegating only baseline 

constant optimization to a numerical solver. Conversely, the candidate decider configuration permits a 

numerical engine to enumerate formulas, but grants the LLM the ultimate authority to evaluate and filter 

which candidates survive.  To complete this spectrum, we included two established baseline extremes: the full -

stack LLM search, represented by two state -of -the -art gener ative methods (LLM -SR and DrSR), and the no -LLM numerical search, represented by pure PySR. 9,10  Detailed role specifications and controlled variants are 

introduced in Supplementary Note 2.      

> Fig. 1 | Role specifications for LLM -assisted symbolic regression. a, Scientific equation discovery is represented as a
> closed -loop process in which task context informs search -space planning, a symbolic -regression engine enumerates and
> fits candidate expressions, and candidate acceptance provides feedback for subsequent planning. This abstraction
> separates three decision points: where to search, which expressions to generate and which candidates to retain. b, Five
> role specifications are obtained by assigning authority over these decision points to language models, numerical
> procedures or both. In the search -controller setting, implemented here as LLM -PySR, the language model proposes
> search -space constraints, whereas PySR performs expression enumeration and deterministic numerical criteria govern
> candidate retention. The remaining settings test alternative allocations in which language models author equations, decide
> candidate acceptance, conduct full -stack search or are removed entirely.

We evaluated these five role specifications across 74 AI -Feynman equations and seven complex symbolic -

regression cases spanning physical, biological, and engineering relations. 23  On the large -scale AI -Feynman 

benchmark, both the search controller and candidate decider demonstrated a profound enhancement in 

predictive accuracy ( AC C0.1) and normalized mean squared error ( NMSE ) compared to the remaining three 

configurations (Fig. 2a). This systemic divergence underscores that leveraging LLMs to guide numerical 

search spaces is fundamentally more effective than relying entirely on generative language models or unguided 

numerical exploration. Crucially, the search controller marginally outperformed the candidate decider, a result 

we attribute to the rigorous numerical stability of deterministic metric gates over LLM -based judgment. 

Language models frequently suffer from hallucinations, stochastic volatility, and numerical insensitivity when 

evaluating complex expressions; this mechanistic vulnerability is empirically confirmed by the significantly 

lower inter -run variance exhibited by the search controller relative to the candidate decider.  Statistics for AI -

Feynman benchmark results can be found in Extended Data Table 1.  Detailed results including recovered 

formulas can be found in Supplementary Note 4. Fig. 2 | Role -dependent performance in symbolic equation discovery.  a,  Predictive performance of the role 

specifications on 74 AI -Feynman equations, measured by  𝐴𝐶 𝐶 0.1 and normalized mean squared error (NMSE).  𝐴𝐶 𝐶 0.1

denotes the fraction of test predictions within 10% relative error, with higher values indicating better bounded -error 

prediction; lower NMSE indicates better overall fit.  b,  Total  LLM  token consumption on the same benchmark, summed 

across all  LLM  calls and shown on a logarithmic scale. The search -controller role combines high predictive accuracy with 

substantially lower  LLM  use than full -stack  LLM  search.  c,  Term -level structural recovery for the oscillator1 and 

oscillator2 stress -test equations. Target terms are listed on the left, and coloured marks indicate terms recovered by each 

role specification, showing both recovery of ground -truth components and generation of spurious terms.  d,  Formula -level 

𝐴𝐶 𝐶 0.1 heat map across seven complex symbolic -regression stress tests spanning biological, chemical, physical and 

engineering relations.  e,  Application of the search -controller framework to lithium -ion battery cycle -life prediction. The 

discovered hinge -like expression relates early voltage -curve displacement,  Δ𝑄 100 −10 ,min  , to  log  10  cycle life. Points 

denote training, validation, in -distribution test and out -of -distribution test cells; the black curve shows the discovered 

expression, the vertical dashed line marks the fitted  breakpoint,  and the shaded region denotes the ± 10% relative -error 

band. Remarkably, this architectural superiority does not incur a higher computational premium; rather, the search 

controller and candidate decider fundamentally compressed the  LLM  footprint. The search controller proved to 

be the most token -efficient configuration, consuming  only  4.1% and 3.2% of the tokens required by full -stack 

LLM methods, while the equation author configuration demanded orders of magnitude more resource 

overhead.  This massive disparity highlights a straightforward operational reality: token consumption is driven 

primarily by the verbosity of the delegated task. The computational bottleneck in generative approaches 

resides in the equation formulation phase, where LLMs must continuously synthesize expansive code 

structures or Python -like symbolic functions. By restricting the LLM to compact, high -leverage boundary 

formulation and delegating the verbose structural assembly to numerical procedures, the search controller 

achieves an optimal alignment of efficiency and precision. 

The seven highly complex, domain -specific equations further exposed the distinct vulnerabilities of granting 

LLMs direct generative or evaluative authority (Fig. 2 d). For the generative roles (equation author and full -

stack LLM), performance was strictly bounded by familiarity from the base LLM. They achieved near -perfect 

accuracy on standard scientific structures (such as CRK0 or oscillator1) by retrieving memorized priors, but 

suffered catastrophic collapse on atypical, highly nonlinear formulations like bactgrow and  stressstrain. This 

failure mode indicates that unconstrained generative LLMs prematurely narrow the exploration space, forcing 

data to fit familiar but mathematically incorrect templates. 

Conversely, the candidate decider configuration exposed a different vulnerability: evaluative instability. 

Although a numerical engine generated the candidates, empowering the LLM to make the final selection led to 

surprisingly poor performance on standard physical relations like oscillator2. This anomaly highlights that 

LLMs lack the fine -grained numerical sensitivity required to reliably distinguish between structurally similar 

candidates with minute residual differences. 

In contrast, the search controller is the sole architecture that isolated the benefits of semantic priors without 

inheriting either generative or evaluative fragility. By strictly delegating both the combinatorial assembly and 

the final candidate retention to deterministic numerical procedures, the  search controller  reliably navigated 

both familiar and atypical mathematical topologies with robust confidence intervals. This fine -grained 

performance gap validates a critical boundary in artificial scientific agency: while language models are 

exceptional at mapping the topology of a hypothesis space, numerical evidence  must provide the ultimate 

selection principle  rather than semantic plausibility  to ensure robustness across diverse scientific domains. 

Having established the robust performance of the search controller on synthetic benchmarks, we sought to 

determine whether this role separation yields physically meaningful relations in real -world scenarios lacking a 

known ground -truth equation. To this end, we deployed our instantiated framework, LLM -PySR, to the early 

prediction of lithium -ion battery lifetime —a critical challenge where degradation labels are intrinsically 

delayed and obscured by high -dimensional measurement noise. 24  Given only raw discharge -voltage 

measurements and semantic context, LLM -PySR  autonomously pinpointed the minimum change in the 

discharge curve between cycles 10 and 100 as the governing coordinate, returning a compact analytical 

relationship: 

𝑙𝑜𝑔 10 (𝑁 𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑒 ) = 9.535 𝑥  + 4.475 |𝑥  + 0.0411 | + 3.208 , x = ΔQ100 −10 ,min  (1) 

where  x is the minimum value of  ΔQ100 −10 ,min  = 𝑄 100 (𝑉 ) − 𝑄 10 (𝑉 ) , which is typically negative.  On a 40 -

cell independent test set, this relation  achieved an  𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸  of 0.0772 and  𝑅 2 = 0.8314. To render the physical meaning explicit, we define the displacement magnitude  𝑑  = −ΔQ100 −10 ,min  , representing the magnitude of 

the most negative early cycle voltage -curve shift. The equation can be rewritten as: 

𝑙𝑜𝑔 10 (𝑁 𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑒 ) = 3.208  − 9.535 𝑑  + 4.475 |0.0411  − 𝑑 |. (2) 

The equation reveals a  piecewise -linear decay, monotonically predicting shorter lifetimes for larger early 

voltage -curve shifts. This autonomous mathematical formulation aligns elegantly with established 

electrochemical domain knowledge: while early capacity fade is often negligible and visually imperceptible, 

underlying degradation modes  such as the loss of active material in the negative electrode  may  silently shift 

the voltage curves long before overt capacity loss appears. 25,26  Consequently, we interpret the discovered 

threshold at  𝑑  ≈ 0.0411  𝐴 ℎ as a data -driven empirical breakpoint marking the transition between mild and 

severe early degradation regimes. This result demonstrates that LLM -PySR, by strictly guiding numerical 

search without forcing structural generation, can  distil  highly predictive and mechanistically interpretable laws 

directly from complex experimental observations. 

Together, the experiments identify role specification as a central design choice in hybrid scientific systems. 

The result is not that language models should be excluded from hypothesis formation. Rather, their broad but 

fallible priors are most useful when expressed as revisable constraints on a transparent numerical search. This 

separation also makes failure easier to  diagnose : poor performance can be attributed to an unsuitable search 

specification, insufficient numerical exploration or an overly permissive acceptance rule, rather than to an 

opaque sequence of generated formulas. The present evidence suggest s a testable principle for their design: 

learned models may guide where hypotheses are sought, while explicit numerical procedures determine which 

hypotheses survive. 

# Discussion 

These results identify role specification as a central design choice in language -model -assisted equation 

discovery. Rather than asking only whether language models should be added to symbolic regression, our 

comparisons ask which decisions should be assigned to them. The answer that emerges from the benchmarks 

is  clear : language models are useful when their semantic priors are expressed as constraints on the search 

space, but less reliable when they are asked to author  equations directly or decide which candidates should be 

retained. In LLM -PySR, the language model proposes variables, transformations, operators and complexity 

schedules, whereas PySR performs expression enumeration and deterministic numerical criteria govern 

candidate retention. Under the tested configurations, this controller role provided the strongest overall balance 

among predictive accuracy, expression complexity, stability and language -model cost, while using less than 

one -twentieth of the tokens required by full -stack generative baselines.  The battery case suggests that this 

division of labour can also be useful beyond synthetic formula recovery. The controller selected early voltage -

curve displacement and returned a compact hinge -like relation with cycle life. Its value is that the recovered 

relation is inspectable, quantitatively testable and linked to a physically meaningful coordinate.  More generally, 

these results support a design principle for scientific AI: learned models may guide where hypotheses are 

sought, but explicit numerical procedures should determine which hypotheses survive. 

# Methods 

Role specifications and common pipeline 

To systematically evaluate the cognitive boundaries of large language models in equation discovery, we 

establish the search controller configuration (the LLM -PySR framework) as our foundational pipeline. This 

framework conceptualizes the SR process through five primary components: (1)  Search -space planning and sanitization: An LLM agent interprets the  scientific context and historical 

memory to propose structured search boundaries (e.g., selected variables, operators, and complexity 

constraints), which are subsequently sanitized by deterministic validity checks. 

(2)  Numerical search and unified evaluation: A deterministic SR engine (PySR) executes low -level 

symbolic enumeration and constant optimization within the constrained search space, returning a pool 

of candidate expressions that are re -evaluated uniformly. 

(3)  Candidate review and metric -based gating: An LLM reviewer provides auxiliary semantic and 

interpretability scores for the candidates, but the final positive/negative feedback labels are strictly 

assigned by deterministic numerical metric gates. 

(4)  Experience memory: An LLM agent synthesizes the deterministic feedback and candidate evaluations 

into a structured experience memory to inform the next planning iteration. 

(5)  Formula simplification and final model selection: A deterministic post -hoc ablation and pruning step 

greedily simplifies subexpressions to ensure the final mathematical formula is maximally compact 

without degrading performance. 

Building upon this modular framework, we define two distinct generative role specifications by shifting the 

computational authority of specific  deterministic steps to the LLM . Equation author alters the second step :

instead of delegating structural enumeration to the numerical engine, the LLM directly generates and proposes 

mathematical equation skeletons based on the context and memory. The numerical solver is restricted to 

baseline constant optimization.  Candidate decider alters the third step : we remove the deterministic metric -

based gating, granting the LLM reviewer the ultimate authority to filter, evaluate, and dictate which  candidate 

equations survive based on its holistic assessment of numerical metrics and semantic plausibility. 

To contextualize these architectural variations, we included two baseline extremes utilizing complete, external 

frameworks. No -LLM numerical search: We employed pure PySR to represent an unguided, purely 

deterministic combinatorial search devoid of semantic priors or LLM intervention. Full -stack LLM search: We 

selected two state -of -the -art LLM -based SR methods, LLM -SR and DrSR, to represent end -to -end generative 

paradigms. LLM -SR utilizes an evolutionary framework where an LLM iteratively proposes, evaluates, and 

mutates candidate equations. Conversely, DrSR employs advanced search -based prompting strategies (such as 

tree -search reasoning) to guide the LLM through step -by -step hypothesis generation and refinement. 

Full details of the LLM -PySR framework are introduced in Extended Data Fig. 1, Supplementary Algorithm 1 

and Supplementary Note 1. Hyperparameter configurations of LLM -PySR are introduced in Supplementary 

Note 3. Detailed prompt templates used in LLM -PySR are introduced in Supplementary Note 5. 

Benchmarks, controls and data splits 

We evaluated the five roles using two synthetic datasets to benchmark the overall performance and  efficiency :

(1)  AI -Feynman dataset. 23  The AI -Feynman dataset comprises 100 physics equations derived from the 

Feynman Lectures on Physics. These equations represent compact analytical relationships commonly 

encountered in physical sciences. To ensure sufficient training data for symbolic regression, equations 

with fewer than 500 samples were removed, leaving 74 equations for evaluating all compared methods. 

(2)  DrSR -aligned complex formula suite. 10  To facilitate direct comparison with full -stack LLM search 

methods, we further evaluated the five roles on the representative formula -recovery tasks adopted in 

the DrSR study. These tasks cover 7 nontrivial symbolic expressions from physics, biology, chemistry, 

and materials science, including nonlinear oscillator dynamics, bacterial growth, stress --strain behaviour, and representative LSR -Transform and LSR -Synth cases  from LLMSR -bench .27  Because 

this suite contains only a small number of representative cases, we use it as a formula -level stress test 

for complex symbolic recovery rather than as a large -scale statistical benchmark. 

For each benchmark equation, at most 500 samples were randomly selected for training, and all remaining 

samples were used for testing.  In addition, for  search controller , equation author  and  candidate decider  that 

follows our controlled pipeline ，the 500 training samples were further split into 250 training samples and 250 

validation samples. The validation set was used only for search feedback, model selection and experience 

accumulation, and the final reported metrics were computed on the held -out test set. 

To ensure a fair comparison for full -stack LLM search, we adopted the default hyperparameter settings 

recommended in the original papers whenever possible, rather than enforcing an identical number of outer -

loop iterations across methods: LLM -SR used a maximum of 2500 generated samples, while DrSR was 

configured with 10 iterations and 4 samples per iteration.  For search controller, LLM -PySR was run for at 

most 10 iterations with a PySR population size of 128. The initial PySR search budget was set to 200 iterations 

and adaptively adjusted within the range of 100 --500 iterations during the search process. Equation author ,

candidate decider  and no -LLM PySR  follows the same settings.  All LLM -based methods used GPT -5.1 as the 

underlying language model. 28 

To further showcase the scientific discovery ability of LLM -PySR, we applied it to a real -world problem with 

limited data: Battery life prediction. Severson et al. generated a dataset containing 124 commercial lithium 

iron phosphate/graphite cells cycled under fast -charging conditions, with widely varying cycle lives ranging 

from 150 to 2,300 cycles. 24  For feature engineering, 11 key statistical indicators (such as variance, minimum, 

and mean) were extracted from the evolution of discharge voltage curves  𝑄 (𝑉 ) over the first 100 cycles 

(e.g., Δ𝑄 100 −10 (𝑉 )), alongside physical measurements including capacity degradation, internal resistance, and 

temperature. The target output feature was the cycle life, defined as the number of cycles until the cell reached 

80% of its nominal capacity. The original study rigorously partitioned the 124 cells into a training set of 41 

cells, a primary test set of 43 cells (which we repurposed as our validation set), and a secondary test set of 40 

cells used for independent evaluation. Consequently, our experiments strictly adhere to this data splitting 

protocol. In the LLM -PySR framework, the 41 -sample training set was utilized for PySR's low -level symbolic 

space exploration and constant optimization. The 43 -sample validation set guided the LLM agents' experience 

feedback and deterministic gating selection. Finally, the 40 -sample independent test set was employed to 

evaluate the generalization performance of the discovered equations. 

Evaluation metrics 

Follo wing DrSR, we  evaluated symbolic regression performance using Accuracy under Error Tolerance ( 𝐴𝐶 𝐶 𝜏 )

and Normalized Mean Squared Error ( 𝑁𝑀𝑆𝐸 ). In all experiments, we set  𝜏  = 0.1. Given test predictions  𝑦 pred 

and ground -truth values  𝑦 true , 𝐴𝐶 𝐶 𝜏  is defined as :

𝐴𝐶 𝐶 𝜏  = 1 

> 𝑛

∑ I(|𝑦 pred ,𝑖  − 𝑦 true ,𝑖 | ≤ τ|𝑦 true ,𝑖 |)𝑛  

> 𝑖 =1

(3) 

where  I(⋅) is the indicator function.  𝐴𝐶 𝐶 𝜏  measures the fraction of predictions whose relative error is bounded 

by the prescribed  tolerance and  therefore reflects the ability of a discovered equation to provide bounded -error 

predictions. 

𝑁𝑀𝑆𝐸  measures the overall prediction error normalized by the variance of the target variable: 𝑁𝑀𝑆𝐸  =     

> 1
> 𝑛 ∑(𝑦 pred ,𝑖 −𝑦 true ,𝑖 )2𝑛
> 𝑖 =1
> 1
> 𝑛 ∑(𝑦 true ,𝑖 −𝑦 true ̅̅̅̅̅̅)2𝑛
> 𝑖 =1

. (4) 

Lower  𝑁𝑀𝑆𝐸  indicates better predictive accuracy, whereas higher  𝐴𝐶 𝐶 𝜏  indicates a larger fraction of 

predictions within the tolerance interval.  To evaluate computational efficiency  and keep a fair comparison 

between different algorithm configurations , we additionally record the overall LLM token consumption, which 

is  computed as the sum of all input and output tokens across all LLM calls made during the search. 

While exact equation recovery is a standard metric for synthetic benchmarks, we intentionally prioritize 

prediction -based metrics. Real -world scientific discovery rarely provides predefined analytical expressions, 

and multiple mathematically distinct expressions can often produce nearly identical predictions under finite, 

noisy observations. 29  Therefore, we rely on  𝐴𝐶 𝐶 𝜏  and  𝑁𝑀𝑆𝐸  for quantitative evaluation, while assessing the 

scientific validity of discovered formulas based on compactness and consistency with domain knowledge. 

Theoretic al  analysis 

We provide a statistical interpretation of the role separation used in this research to clarify the potential trade -

offs  from different LLM roles and actions. 

Let  𝒟  = {(𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑖 )}𝑖 =1 

> 𝑛

be sampled from an unknown distribution  𝑃  , and let  𝑅 (𝑓 ) = 𝐸 (𝑥 ,𝑦 )∼𝑃 [𝐿 (𝑓 (𝑥 ), 𝑦 )]

denote the population risk under a bounded loss  𝐿 . Let  𝑅 ̂𝑛 (𝑓 ) be the empirical risk. In a standard PAC -style 

uniform convergence bound, for a fixed symbolic hypothesis class  ℱ, with probability at least  1 − δ,

sup 

> 𝑓 ∈ℱ

|𝑅 (𝑓 ) − 𝑅 ̂𝑛 (𝑓 )| ≲ √𝐶 (ℱ)+log (1/δ) 

> 𝑛

(5) 

where  𝐶 (ℱ) denotes an appropriate statistical complexity measure of the class, such as pseudo -dimension, 

covering complexity or a Rademacher -complexity -based term. If an algorithm returns an approximate 

empirical -risk minimizer  𝑓 ̂ ∈ ℱ satisfying 

𝑅 ̂𝑛 (𝑓 ̂ ) ≤ inf 

> 𝑓 ∈ℱ

𝑅 ̂𝑛 (𝑓 ) + η, (6) 

then the corresponding excess risk over the best function in  ℱ obeys 

𝑅 (𝑓 ̂ ) − inf 

> 𝑓 ∈ℱ

𝑅 (𝑓 ) ≲ √𝐶 (ℱ)+log (1/δ) 

> 𝑛

+ η. (7) 

In symbolic regression, the additional term  η is important. Unlike convex empirical -risk minimization, 

symbolic regression relies on finite -budget combinatorial search and constant optimization; hence the returned 

expression need not be the empirical optimum of the specified symbolic class. We therefore interpret  η as a 

finite -budget search error. 

Let  ℱ0 denote the full symbolic class accessible to an unconstrained PySR run under the global variable set, 

operator set and maximal expression complexity. At an LLM -PySR iteration, the LLM planner returns a 

search specification  ϕ , including selected variables, allowed operators, engineered transformations and complexity constraints. This induces a restricted symbolic class  ℱϕ ⊆ ℱ0. The full -class oracle is  𝑓 0 

> ⋆

∈

arg  min 

> 𝑓 ∈ℱ0

𝑅  (𝑓 ). Because LLM -PySR searches only inside  ℱϕ , it may exclude the full -class optimum. We 

define the pruning bias as  ℬ𝜙  = inf 

> 𝑓 ∈ℱϕ

𝑅  (𝑓 ) − inf 

> 𝑓 ∈ℱ0

𝑅  (𝑓 ), this term is zero only when the LLM -induced 

restricted class retains a population -risk minimizer, or at least a near -optimal expression, from the full 

symbolic class. 

If  ϕ is selected from data, an additional model -selection cost must also be paid. We denote this cost by  Λϕ. For 

a finite set of possible search specifications,  Λ𝜙  can be taken as  log (1/π (ϕ)) under a prior over specifications 

π(ϕ) > 0, ∑ π(ϕ) ≤ 1ϕ∈Φ . This term accounts for the fact that a data -dependent search space is not a free 

prior. 

Combining these terms, LLM -PySR admits the following decomposition: 

𝑅 (𝑓 ̂𝜙 ) − 𝑅 (𝑓 0

> ⋆

) ≲ ℬϕ⏟

> pruning bias

+ √𝐶 (ℱ𝜙 )+Λϕ+log (1/δ)

> 𝑛

⏟

> statistical estimation error

+ 𝜂 𝜙 (𝑁 eval )⏟ 

> finite -budget searc herror

(8) 

where  𝑁 eval  denotes the expression -evaluation budget used by the symbolic search engine. 

This decomposition clarifies why merely reducing the search space is not sufficient. Search -space restriction 

decreases the statistical complexity term only if 

𝐶 (ℱϕ) < 𝐶 (ℱ0). (9) 

For monotone complexity measures, this follows from  ℱϕ ⊆ ℱ0 . Another intuitive indicator expression 

skeleton count number  |𝑆 𝐾 | ≈ 𝑂 (𝐾 𝐿 ) shows  the number of admissible expression structures grows with the 

number of possible operators :

|𝑆 𝐾 𝜙  | ∼ 𝑂 (𝐾 𝜙 𝐿 ), |𝑆 𝐾 0 | ∼ 𝑂 (𝐾 0𝐿 ), 𝐾 𝜙  < 𝐾 0 (10) 

where  𝐾 𝜙  and  𝐾 0 represent the number of possible operators of LLM -PySR and PySR , and  𝐿  represents the 

skeleton length . However,  it may simultaneously increase the pruning bias  ℬϕ . Therefore, LLM -PySR  is 

advantageous only when the reduction in statistical and search complexity outweighs the approximation loss 

caused by excluding parts of the full symbolic class. 

For an unconstrained PySR baseline, the corresponding bound is: 

𝑅 (𝑓 ̂0) − 𝑅 (𝑓 0

> ⋆

) ≲ √𝐶 (ℱ0)+log (1/δ) 

> 𝑛

+ η0(𝑁 eval ). (11) 

Thus, LLM -PySR is theoretically favoured over unconstrained PySR under the sufficient condition: 

ℬ𝜙  + √𝐶 (ℱϕ)+Λϕ+log (1/δ) 

> 𝑛

+ 𝜂 𝜙 (𝑁 eval ) < √𝐶 (ℱ0)+log (1/𝛿 ) 

> 𝑛

+ 𝜂 0(𝑁 eval ). (12) This condition exposes the central bias --complexity --search trade -off. Plain PySR has no pruning bias, because 

it searches the full symbolic class,  but it generally pays a larger statistical complexity penalty and may suffer a 

larger finite -budget search error.  LLM -PySR accepts a nonzero pruning bias in exchange for a lower -

complexity symbolic class and a potentially easier search problem. This advantage is most pronounced when 

semantic priors remove many irrelevant expressions while preserving the region containing a near -optimal 

formula. 

We can view the risk bound of equation author with the same inequality: 

𝑅 (𝑓 ̂𝑎𝑢𝑡 ℎ𝑜𝑟 ) − 𝑅 (𝑓 0

> ⋆

) ≲ ℬ𝑎𝑢𝑡 ℎ𝑜𝑟  + √𝐶 (ℱ𝑎𝑢𝑡 ℎ𝑜𝑟 )+Λ𝑎𝑢𝑡 ℎ𝑜𝑟 +log (1/δ) 

> 𝑛

+ 𝜂 𝑎𝑢𝑡 ℎ𝑜𝑟 (𝑁 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 ) (13) 

In this role, the LLM directly proposes a finite set of equation skeletons. If  𝑀 𝑎𝑢𝑡 ℎ𝑜𝑟  skeletons are generated, 

the structural selection component  can be  much smaller than that of a broad symbolic search space, and 

𝐶 (ℱ𝑎𝑢𝑡 ℎ𝑜𝑟 ) can be substantially smaller than  𝐶 (ℱϕ) and  𝐶 (ℱ0), up to the remaining complexity of fitting 

constants within each skeleton. However, this aggressive compression can substantially increase the pruning 

bias  ℬ𝑎𝑢𝑡 ℎ𝑜𝑟 , because the generated skeletons are discrete samples from the LLM prior and may fail to cover 

the region containing the true or near -optimal formula.  Our empirical results are consistent with this 

interpretation: direct equation authorship often produces formulas close to familiar LLM priors, which reduces 

structural complexity but can incur large pruning bias when the target relation is atypical. Search control, by 

contrast, uses the LLM prior only to delimit the operator space while leaving structural enumeration and 

constant optimization to PySR. This allows the system to retain broader coverage within a restricted subspace, 

leading to a more favourable balance between pruning bias, statistical complexity and finite -budget search 

error. 

For the candidate  decider role, the symbolic search space may remain  the same as search controller  because 

PySR still generates candidate expressions. However, the final selection is delegated to the LLM. This 

introduces an additional selection -noise  term: 

𝑅 (𝑓 ̂𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟 ) − 𝑅 (𝑓 0

> ⋆

) ≲ ℬϕ + √𝐶 (ℱϕ)+Λϕ+log (1/δ) 

> 𝑛

+ 𝜂 ϕ(𝑁 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 ) + ζLLM , (14) 

considering  candidate decider  inherits all other parts from  search controller  other than the  term  𝜁 LLM . This 

term introduces additional selection noise, which captures the risk gap between the LLM -selected candidate 

and the numerically best candidate in the pool. This decomposition also explains why the  candidate decider 

can exhibit average performance close to that of the  search controller : in the matched setting, most error terms 

are shared, and the performance gap is mainly governed by  𝜁 LLM . When LLM judgment agrees with numerical 

selection, this gap is small; when the LLM is insensitive to fine residual differences or overweights semantic 

plausibility,  𝜁 LLM  can increase and lead to unstable or suboptimal selection. 

Thus, the advantage of LLM -PySR is not simply that it reduces the search space. Rather, it uses semantic 

priors to reduce operator -induced symbolic complexity while preserving numerical enumeration within the 

restricted class and avoiding LLM -based final selection.  This role separation seeks a favourable balance 

among pruning bias, statistical complexity and finite -budget search error,  while preventing semantic 

plausibility from overriding numerical evidence. Data availability 

All dataset to conduct the experiments, as well as the experiment result data are available at 

https://github.com/XieZikai/LLM -PySR .

# Code availability 

All Python scripts for LLM -PySR , as well as the equation author variant and candidate decider variant are 

available at  https://github.com/XieZikai/LLM -PySR .

# References 

1.  Makke, N. & Chawla, S.  Artif. Intell. Rev.  57, 2 (2024). 

2.  Brunton, S. L., Proctor, J. L. & Kutz, J. N.  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  113, 3932 –3937 (2016). 

3.  Nair, A. S., Foppa, L. & Scheffler, M.  npj Comput. Mater . 11, 150 (2025). 

4.  Angelis, D., Sofos, F. & Karakasidis, T. E.  Arch. Comput. Methods En g. 30, 3845 –3865 (2023). 

5.  Wang, T.  et al.  Science  386, 915 –920 (2024). 

6.  Vaddireddy , H., Rasheed, A., Staples, A. E. & San, O.  Phys. Fluids  32, (2020). 

7.  Bartel, C. J.  et al.  Nat. Commun.  9, 4168 (2018). 

8.  Virgolin, M. & Pissis, S. P.  Trans. Mach. Learn. Res . 10, 1 –11 (2022). 

9.  Shojaee , P., Meidani, K., Gupta, S., Barati Farimani, A. & Reddy, C. in  International Conference on 

Learning Representations  vol. 2025 16054 –16085 (2025). 

10.  Wang, R., Wang, B., Li, K., Zhang, Y. & Cheng, J.  ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv250604282  (2025). 

11.  Guo, Z. et al.  Proc. Natl Acad. Sci . USA 122, e2516995122 (2025). 

12.  Merler, M., Haitsiukevich, K., Dainese, N. & Marttinen, P. In  Proc. 62nd Annual Meeting of the 

Association for Computational Linguistics  (Volume 4: Student Research Workshop) 427 –444 (Association for 

Computational Linguistics, 2024). 

13.  Schmidt, M. & Lipson, H.  science  324, 81 –85 (2009). 

14.  Ouyang, R., Curtarolo, S., Ahmetcik, E., Scheffler, M. & Ghiringhelli, L. M.  Phys. Rev. Mater.  2, 083802 

(2018). 

15.  Cranmer, M.  ArXiv Prepr.  ArXiv230501582  (2023). 

16.  Bartlett, D. J., Desmond, H. & Ferreira, P. G.  IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput.  28, 950 –964 (2024). 

17.  Mundhenk, T., Landajuela, M., Glatt, R., Santiago, C. P. & Petersen, B. K.  Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 

34, 24912 –24923 (2021). 

18.  Olivetti de Franç a, F.  Inf. Sci.  442 –443, 18 –32 (2018). 

19.  Yao, S.  et al.  ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv 221003629  (202 3). 

20.  Carlini, N.  et al.  in  30th USENIX Security Symposium  (USENIX Security 21) 2633 –2650 (USENIX 

Association, 2021) 

21.  Mirzadeh, I.  et al.  in  International Conference on Learning Representations  vol. 2025 94743 –94765 

(2025). 

22.  Ji, Z.  et al.  ACM Comput. Surv.  55, 1 –38 (2023). 

23.  Udrescu, S. -M. & Tegmark, M.  Sci. Adv.  6, eaay2631 (2020). 

24.  Severson, K. A.  et al.  Nat. Energy  4, 383 –391 (2019). 

25.  Dubarry, M., Truchot, C. & Liaw, B. Y.  J. Power Sources  219, 204 –216 (2012). 

26.  Anseá n, D.  et al.  J. Power Sources  321, 201 –209 (2016). 

27.  Shojaee, P.  et al.  ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv250410415  (2025). 

28.  Singh, A.  et al.  ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv 260103267  (202 6).

29.  Rissanen, J.  Automatica  14, 465 –471 (1978). Acknowledgements 

The AI -driven experiments, simulations and model training were performed on the robotic AI -Scientist 

platform of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). L.C. acknowledges the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (Grant 22573101) and the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) 

Startup Program for funding. J.J. acknowledges the CAS Strategic Priority Research Program (Grant 

XDB0450302), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 22025304, 22033007), and the CAS 

Project for Young Scientists in Basic Research (Grant YSBR -005) for funding. 

# Author contributions 

L.C., J.J. and Z.X. conceived the idea. Z.X. and W.L. designed the algorithm workflow, implemented the 

algorithm and conducted the experiments. M.L. designed and prepared all figures. Z.X. and L.C.  led  the 

writing , with contributions from  all authors. 

# Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

# Additional information 

Extended Data Fig 1.  | Detailed workflow of LLM -PySR algorithm.  LLM -PySR  operates as an iterative search -

controller framework for symbolic regression. Given data, task context, variable semantics, an admissible operator set and 

accumulated experience memory, an LLM planner proposes a bounded search plan specifying candidate variables, 

engineered features, operators, transformations and expression depth. This plan is sanitized by deterministic safeguards 

and executed by PySR, which enumerates symbolic expressions and fits constants. Candidate formulas are assessed by a 

unified programmatic evaluator, while deterministic metric gates assign retention labels based on predictive error, 

tolerance accuracy, complexity and stability. LLM -based review is used only as auxiliary semantic feedback, and the 

accepted numerical outcomes are summarized into experience memory for the next iteration. After the iterative search, 

simplicity -guided selection and post -hoc ablation pruning yield the final compact interpretable formula. 

Extended Data Table 1 | Summary performance and  LLM  footprint on the AI -Feynman benchmark. 

Role  ACC 0.1  ↑ NMSE  ↓ Token  ↓

Search controller (LLM -PySR)  0.958  ±0.165  0.034  ±0.023  91,273  ±74,873 

Equation author  0.892  ±0.259  0.387  ±2.050  449,627  ±315,861 Candidate decider  0.952  ±0.183  0.030  ±0.135  102,527  ± 89,787 

No -LLM (PySR)  0.922  ±0.237  0.104  ±0.170  —

Full -LLM (LLM -SR)  0.892  ±0.270  0.051  ±0.028  2,208,135  ±464,128 

Full -LLM (DrSR)  0.665  ±0.385  0.169  ±0.068  2,835,147  ±893,329 

Values are reported as mean ± s.d.  across the 74 AI -Feynman equations. ACC0.1 denotes the fraction of test predictions 

within a relative -error tolerance of 0.1, with higher values indicating better predictive accuracy. NMSE denotes 

normalized mean squared error, with lower values indicating better predictive accuracy. Total LLM tokens are computed 

as the sum of input and output tokens across all LLM calls made during the search. The no -LLM PySR baseline makes no 

LLM  calls; therefore, LLM -token usage is not applicable. The best performances are shown in bold. Supplementary Information 

# Language models guide symbolic equation discovery by controlling search 

Zikai Xie 1,2,†, *, Wenmei Li 1,† , Man Luo 1, Jun Jiang 1,2, * and Linjiang Chen 1,2,3, * 

> 1

State  Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, Hefei National Research Center for Physical 

Sciences at the Microscale, School of Chemistry and Materials Science, University of Science and Technology 

of China, Hefei, China.  

> 2

Center for Scientific Intelligence Innovation, Hefei, China  

> 3

School of Chemistry, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK  

> †

These authors contributed equally: Zikai Xie,  Wenmei Li 

* Corresponding authors:  linjiangchen@ustc.edu.cn , jiangj1@ustc.edu.cn,  zikaix@ustc.edu.cn 

# Table of Contents 

Supplementary Table 1.  LLM -PySR  outer -loop and LLM settings.  10 

Supplementary Table 2.  PySR settings inside LLM -PySR.  11 

Supplementary Table 3.  LLM -PySR search -scheduling and simplification settings  11 

Supplementary Table 4.  Standalone PySR baseline settings.  12 

Supplementary Table 5.  LLM -SR baseline settings . 13 

Supplementary Table 6.  DrSR baseline settings.  14 

Supplementary Table 7.  Equation author settings.  15 

Supplementary Note 1.  LLM -PySR implementation details . 2

Supplementary Note 2.  Role specifications and controlled variants.  6

Supplementary Note 3.  Hyperparameter settings for the experiments.  9

Supplementary Note 4.  Complete evaluation results across role specifications.  17 

Supplementary Note  5. Detailed  prompt  templates  in LLM -PySR.  121 

Supplementary Algorithm 1.  LLM -PySR search -controller algorithm . 5Supplementary Note 1.  LLM -PySR implementation details 

LLM -PySR  is a closed -loop symbolic regression framework that uses LLM agents to control the search 

behavior of PySR rather than directly generate final equations. This design is related to recent agentic LLM 

frameworks that use reasoning, feedback, and memory to improve iterative decision making. Given a training 

set  𝒟 tr , an optional validation set  𝒟 val , and task context  𝑐  including variable semantics and units, LLM -PySR 

maintains an experience memory  ℳ𝑡  over search iterations. 

At iteration  𝑡 , a  search -space planner proposes a search plan 

π𝑡  = (ℰ𝓉 , 𝒳 𝓉 , 𝒪 𝓉 , 𝒰 𝓉 , 𝑑 𝑡 ),

where  ℰ𝓉  denotes engineered features,  𝒳 𝓉  denotes selected input variables,  𝒪 𝓉  denotes selected base operators, 

𝒰 𝓉  denotes custom operators, and  𝑑 𝑡  denotes the maximum search depth. The raw plan is sanitized by 

deterministic validity checks and trust -region constraints before being passed to PySR. PySR then searches for 

candidate expressions under the resulting search configuration and returns a candidate pool  𝒫 𝓉 .

Each candidate is evaluated by a unified evaluator on both training and validation data. A reviewer agent 

provides auxiliary semantic scores  𝑟 𝑡  , but final positive and negative feedback labels  𝑧 𝑡  are assigned by 

deterministic metric -based gates. These labels are then compressed by a memory -building agent into structured 

evidence memory  ℳ𝓉  about useful features, operators, and search -depth choices. The updated memory is used 

to guide the next planning step. This design separates high -level semantic reasoning from low -level symbolic 

enumeration and numerical optimization, while reducing the risk that LLM -generated feedback overrides 

numerical evidence. The psuedo -code of the whole algorithm is illustrated in  Supplementary Algorithm 1 .

The five core components of LLM -PySR are introduced below: 

Agent -A: Search space planner agent.  At iteration  𝑡 , Agent A proposes the search configuration for the next 

PySR run. It receives the task context, variable descriptions, a compact data snapshot, column -level statistics, 

the current experience memory, the previous candidate -review summary, the maximum -depth 

recommendation from the memory builder, and the globally admissible base -operator set. It outputs a single 

structured plan consisting of engineered features, a selected PySR input -feature subset, a selected subset of 

base operators, optional custom unary or binary operators, and a recommended maximum search depth. Each 

engineered feature contains a name, an expression, a rationale, and a dimension -check field. The selected base 

operators must come from the global operator whitelist, while custom operators are restricted to formal 

arguments only, e.g.,  𝑥  for unary operators and  (𝑥 , 𝑦 ) for binary operators. In our implementation, we use at 

most five selected input features, at most  𝐾 custom  custom operators, and restrict the recommended maximum 

depth to [6,40]. 

The raw planner output is not directly executed. Instead, LLM -PySR applies a deterministic sanitization 

operator  Γ before passing the plan to PySR: 

π𝑡 ̃ = Γ(π𝑡 

> raw

, ℳ𝓉 −1).

This sanitization step removes invalid or redundant custom operators, deduplicates engineered features, rejects 

unsafe or overly composite feature transformations, and materializes a proposed feature only if it can be safely 

evaluated on all samples with finite outputs. Although Agent A may provide a dimension -check rationale, 

dimensional validity is determined by deterministic unit -propagation rules rather than by the LLM itself. To 

prevent abrupt expansion of the search space, we further impose progressiv e feature engineering, allowing at 

most  𝐾 new  new engineered features per iteration, with  𝐾 new  = 3 by default. In addition, once a planner 

configuration yields the current best formula, it is stored as an anchor configuration; subsequent plans are constrained to make only limited changes around this anchor. When a historically successful planner 

configuration is available,  Γ also applies a trust -region constraint that limits excessive deviation from the best 

previous plan. If the system receives no positive feedback for several consecutive iterations, the planner 

configuration is rolled back toward the best historical Agent -A plan. This validation -and -control mechanism 

stabilizes the search loop by ensuring executable plans, limiting combinatorial growth, and preventing noisy 

LLM feedback from causing large search -space drift. 

PySR search and deterministic evaluation.  Given the sanitized plan, PySR performs low -level symbolic 

search over the selected variables, primitive operators, custom operators, and complexity constraints. 

Engineered features are computed using a safe expression evaluator and are included only if they produce 

finite values with the correct sample dimension. When unit annotations are available, units are propagated 

through engineered features by deterministic dimensional -analysis rules and passed to PySR as additional 

constraints. The PySR search budget is scheduled adaptively across iterations: larger selected feature/operator 

sets and low recent ACC lead to more PySR iterations, whereas high -ACC rounds reduce the search budget. 

PySR returns a pool of candidate expressions  𝒫 𝓉  together with its native loss, score, and complexity. We then 

re -evaluate all candidates using a unified evaluator on both training and validation data, if available, 

computing normalized mean squared error and tolerance accuracy. Constant formulas and invalid expressions 

are filtered out before review. When engineered features are used, expressions selected for the incumbent or 

final report are recursively expanded back to the original variables, so that the reported model is expressed in 

the original problem variables rather than in temporary engineered -feature names. 

Agent -B: Candidate reviewer agent.  The reviewer agent evaluates the candidate expressions returned by 

PySR and assigns an auxiliary score  𝑟 𝑡  to each expression. Its input includes the symbolic expression, PySR -

native metrics, and the metrics recomputed by our pipeline, including training ACC, validation ACC, NMSE, 

validation NMSE, PySR loss, PySR score, and expression complexity. Agent -B is prompted to score each 

candidate according to numerical fit quality, simplicity, interpretability, and consistency with the semantic 

descriptions of the variables. In particular, validation ACC is treated as the primary reliability signal, followed 

by training ACC, NMSE, PySR loss, and PySR score as a secondary tie -breaker. The prompt also imposes 

conservative score -calibration rules: low -accuracy expressions cannot receive high reviewer scores, and scores 

above a high threshold are only permitted when both training and validation accuracy are sufficiently strong. 

Thus, Agent -B provides a semantically informed but calibrated quality estimate rather than an unconstrained 

subjective preference. 

The reviewer score is advisory rather than decisive. Final feedback labels  𝑧 𝑡  are assigned by deterministic 

gates outside the LLM. In the bootstrap stage, where no reliable incumbent is available, only a small elite 

subset of numerically top -ranked candidates can be labeled positive, and they must satisfy minimum accuracy 

and reviewer -score thresholds. In later iterations, each candidate is compared with the current best expression 

using training ACC, validation ACC, NMSE, PySR loss, and PySR score. A positive label is assigned only 

when the candidate belongs to the elite numerical subset and receives sufficient metric -based support relative 

to the incumbent; otherwise the label is forced to negative, even if the LLM reviewer assigns a high score. 

This hybrid design preserves the LLM's ability to assess interpretability and semantic plausibility, while 

preventing optimistic or inconsistent LLM judgments from being directly propagated to the memory module. 

Agent -C: Experiment memory agent.  The memory agent converts the outcome of each PySR run into 

structured search experience for the next planning step. Its input contains the sanitized Agent -A plan  π𝑡 ̃ ,

together with the reviewed candidate pool and the deterministic positive/negative labels  (𝒫 𝓉 , 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 ) from 

Agent -B. To reduce noise in the feedback signal, we separate the evidence into two channels. Candidates 

labeled positive and satisfying minimum training and validation ACC thresholds are treated as strong evidence, while low -accuracy positives and the best metric -ranked negative candidates are retained as a weak 

exploratory channel. The strong channel is used to identify reliable feature combinations, useful primitive 

operators, and appropriate search -depth ranges. The weak channel is not allowed to dominate the memory, but 

it can suggest exploratory directions when the current search space is underperforming. Agent -C is therefore 

prompted to output concise guidance  ℳ𝓉  rather than free -form reflections: good and bad feature combinations, 

good and bad primitive operators, and an optional recommended maximum expression depth. In addition, 

when the selected operator set remains nearly unchanged for multiple rounds and the best metrics show little 

improvement, the memory supplied to Agent -A is augmented with an exploration hint that recommends trying 

unused primitive operators not marked as harmful by Agent -C. Then this guidance is passed to Agent -A to 

santize  π𝑡  

> 𝑟𝑎𝑤

into  π𝑡 , forming an iterative self -learning loop. 

Formula simplification and final model selection.  To improve interpretability, LLM -PySR applies two 

levels of simplification. During each iteration, Agent -B prefers simpler candidates when their training and 

validation tolerance accuracy remain within a small degradation tolerance of the current best expression. After 

the search terminates, a post -hoc symbolic ablation pruning step greedily replaces subexpressions with simple 

constants when doing so reduces complexity without materially degrading training or validation performance. 

Supplementary Algorithm 1.  LLM -PySR  search -controller  algorithm 

Supplement 

ary Note 2. 

Role 

specification 

s and 

controlled 

variants 

To isolate the 

effect of 

assigning 

different 

scientific -

discovery 

functions to 

language 

models, we 

define 

symbolic 

regression as 

a three -stage 

closed -loop 

process: search -space planning, expression enumeration and candidate acceptance. Search -space planning 

determines which variables, engineered features, primitive operators, custom transformations and expression -

Algorithm  1 LLM -PySR 

Require:  Training data  𝒟 𝑡𝑟 , validation data  𝒟 𝑣𝑎𝑙 , context  𝑐 , base operator set  𝒪 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 , number 

of iterations  𝑇 

1: Initialize memory  ℳ0 ← ∅ and best formula  𝑓 ⋆ ← ∅

2:  for  𝑡  = 1, … , 𝑇  do 

3:  𝜋 𝑡 

> raw

Planner (𝑐 , 𝒟 t, ℳ𝓉 −1, 𝒪 bs )

4:  𝜋 𝑡  ← Sanitize (𝜋 𝑡 

> raw

, ℳ𝓉 −1)

5: Construct engineered features and transformed datasets using  𝜋 𝑡 

6:  𝒫 𝓉  ← PySR (𝒟 t; 𝜋 𝑡 )

7: Evaluate each  𝑓  ∈ 𝒫 𝓉  on  𝒟 𝑡𝑟  and  𝒟 𝑣𝑎𝑙 

8:  𝑟 𝑡  ← Reviewer (𝑐 , 𝒫 𝓉 , 𝑓 ⋆)

9:  𝑧 𝑡  ← Gate (𝒫 𝓉 , 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑓 ⋆)

10:  𝑓 ⋆ ← UpdateBest (𝑓 ⋆, 𝒫 𝓉 , 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 )

11:  ℳ𝓉  ← MemoryBuilder (ℳ𝓉 −1, 𝜋 𝑡 , 𝒫 𝓉 , 𝑧 𝑡 )

12:  end for 

13:  𝑓 ⋆ ← AblationPrune (𝑓 ⋆, 𝒟 𝑡𝑟 , 𝒟 𝑣𝑎𝑙 )

14:  return  𝑓 ⋆complexity constraints are made available to the search. Expression enumeration determines which 

mathematical structures are generated and fitted. Candidate acceptance determines which expressions are 

retained as positive evidence, used to update the search memory, or selected as incumbents. The five role 

specifications compared in this study differ only in how decision authority over these three stages is allocated 

between LLM -based agents and deterministic numerical procedures. 

Search controller: LLM -PySR . The search -controller configuration is the proposed LLM -PySR framework ,

following the algorithm  demonstrated  in Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary Algorithm 1 . In this role, 

the LLM has authority only over high -level search -space planning. At each iteration, the LLM planner 

proposes a bounded search plan containing selected variables, engineered features, allowed operators, optional 

custom transformations and a recommended maximum expression depth. This plan is sanitized by 

deterministic validity, safety and trust -region checks before execution. The LLM is not allowed to directly 

generate candidate equations. 

Expression enumeration is performed entirely by PySR. Given the sanitized search configuration, PySR carries 

out symbolic enumeration and constant optimization, returning a candidate pool with native loss, score and 

complexity values. Candidate expressions are then re -evaluated by the unified evaluator using the same 

training and validation metrics across all controlled variants. 

Candidate acceptance in LLM -PySR is LLM -assisted but numerically gated. The reviewer agent provides 

auxiliary semantic and plausibility assessments, but final positive and negative labels are assigned by 

deterministic metric -based gates. These labels, rather than unconstrained LLM preferences, are passed to the 

experience -memory agent and used to guide the next iteration. Thus, the search controller tests whether LLMs 

are most useful when they shape the search space while numerical procedures retain authority over expression 

generation and retention. 

Equation author controlled variant . The equation -author variant tests the consequence of granting the LLM 

direct structural -generation authority. It preserves the same outer -loop interface as LLM -PySR, including the 

same task context, data summaries, experience memory, validation feedback and unified evaluation protocol. 

However, instead of using PySR to enumerate candidate expressions, the LLM is asked at each iteration to 

propose a set of candidate equation skeletons directly. 

Each proposed skeleton is parsed and sanitized before numerical fitting. Expressions that cannot be safely 

evaluated, contain invalid operations or violate basic syntactic constraints are discarded. For the remaining 

skeletons, numerical optimization is used only to fit scalar constants. The fitted formulas are then evaluated on 

the same training and validation splits as in the search -controller configuration. 

Candidate review and feedback update follow the same LLM -assisted, metric -gated procedure used in LLM -

PySR. Therefore, the equation -author variant primarily changes the expression -enumeration stage: structural 

search is no longer performed by PySR, but by repeated LLM proposal of candidate mathematical forms. This 

variant tests whether direct LLM equation authorship can replace numerical symbolic enumeration, or whether 

it prematurely restricts the structural search to formulas favoured by the LLM prior. 

Candidate decider controlled variant . The candidate -decider variant tests the effect of granting the LLM 

final evaluative authority. It keeps the search -space planning and expression -enumeration stages identical to 

LLM -PySR: the LLM planner proposes a bounded search configuration, the configuration is sanitized, and 

PySR generates and fits candidate expressions within the resulting search space. Thus, the candidate pool 

available to the decider is generated by the same numerical symbolic -search procedure used in the search -

controller configuration. The difference lies in candidate acceptance. In LLM -PySR, Agent -B provides advisory semantic review and 

deterministic metric gates assign the final positive and negative labels. In the candidate -decider variant, the 

deterministic gating module is removed as the final authority. Instead, the LLM examines the candidate -review 

records produced from Agent -B, together with the numerical metrics reported by the unified evaluator, and 

determines which candidates should be retained. These LLM -assigned labels are passed directly to Agent -C

and used to update the experience memory for subsequent search -space planning. 

This design isolates LLM -based evaluative judgment from LLM -based structural generation. Because PySR 

still enumerates the candidate expressions, any performance difference between the candidate decider and the 

search controller can be attributed primarily to replacing metric -gated candidate retention with LLM -based 

acceptance. 

Full -stack LLM search . The full -stack LLM setting represents the opposite extreme from LLM -PySR. In this 

role, the language model is responsible for most of the discovery loop, including hypothesis generation, 

refinement and selection. We use LLM -SR and DrSR as representative full -stack LLM -based symbolic -

regression methods. These methods do not merely restrict the search space for a separate symbolic -regression 

engine; rather, they rely on the LLM to generate and iteratively refine candidate equation structures through 

repeated prompting and feedback. 

The full -stack setting therefore tests whether end -to -end LLM -driven search can match or exceed a division -

of -labour architecture in which the LLM controls only the search boundary while numerical procedures 

perform enumeration and selection. Because these methods are external baselines rather than controlled 

modifications of LLM -PySR, we use their recommended search settings whenever possible and report their 

language -model token footprint separately. 

No -LLM numerical search . The no -LLM configuration represents a purely numerical symbolic -regression 

baseline. We instantiate this role using PySR without language -model planning, review or memory. The 

method searches within a fixed admissible space defined by the global input variables, primitive operator set 

and expression -complexity constraints. Candidate expressions are generated, optimized and selected using 

numerical procedures only. 

This baseline tests whether the benefit of LLM -PySR arises from useful semantic restriction of the search 

space rather than from PySR alone. Compared with the search controller, the no -LLM baseline has no LLM -

induced pruning bias, but it also lacks semantic guidance for selecting variables, operators, engineered 

transformations and search -depth schedules. 

Together, these controlled variants distinguish three forms of LLM authority: planning authority, generative 

authority and evaluative authority. The search -controller design assigns the LLM only the first of these  roles, 

while leaving expression enumeration and candidate retention under numerical control. The equation -author 

and candidate -decider variants selectively transfer generative or evaluative authority to the LLM, respectively, 

allowing the effect of each role assignment to be evaluated under otherwise matched data interfaces and 

evaluation metrics. 

Supplementary Note 3.  Hyperparameter settings for the experiments 

This section summarizes the hyperparameter settings used for LLM -PySR, its controlled role -specification 

variants, and the external baseline methods. Unless otherwise specified, all LLM -based methods used GPT -5.1 as the base language model. Prediction accuracy was evaluated using the tolerance accuracy metric with 

relative -error threshold τ=0.1. A test prediction was counted as accurate if its relative error was no larger than 

0.1. Normalized mean squared error (NMSE) was computed as MSE/Var(y). Total LLM -token usage was 

computed as the sum of input and output tokens across all LLM calls made during the search. 

LLM -PySR search -controller configuration . The main LLM -PySR  configuration used a three -agent search -

controller pipeline. The language model proposed bounded search specifications, whereas PySR performed 

symbolic enumeration and constant optimization. Deterministic numerical gates, rather than unconstrained 

LLM judgments, assigned the final candidate -retention labels. The main outer -loop and LLM settings 

Supplementary Table  1.

Supplementary Table  1 | LLM -PySR outer -loop and LLM settings 

Component  Hyperparameter  Value 

LLM model  model  gpt -5.1 

LLM sampling  llm_temperature  0.1 

Outer loop  max_iterations  10 

Early stopping  target_score  0.99 

Early stopping  target_acc  0.99 

Early stopping  min_iterations_before_stop  2

Accuracy tolerance  acc_tau  0.1 

Custom operators  max_custom_ops  3 per iteration 

Engineered features  max_engineered_features  3 per iteration 

Progressive feature engineering  progressive_feature_engineering  enabled 

Post -search pruning  enable_post_ablation_prune  enabled 

Maximum pruning steps  max_ablation_prune_steps  12 

The globally admissible primitive operator pool available to the LLM planner consisted of :

+,  -, ×, /,  ^,  √⋅, log,  𝑙𝑜𝑔 10 , exp, sin, cos, tan, | ⋅|, min, max, arcsin, arccos, arctan, sinh, cosh, tanh, asinh, acosh, 

atanh. 

The PySR component used the settings in Supplementary Table  2. The initial PySR search budget was 200 

iterations and was adaptively adjusted between 100 and 500 iterations according to the size of the selected 

search space and recent search performance. The default maximum expression depth was 20, whereas the 

LLM -recommended maximum depth was constrained to the interval 6 –40 before execution. 

Supplementary Table  2 | PySR settings inside LLM -PySR PySR hyperparameter  Value 

population_size  128 

Initial niterations  200 

Dynamic niterations range  100 –500 

fixed_pysr_niterations  False 

maxsize  30 

Default maxdepth  20 

Allowed LLM -recommended maxdepth  6–40 

Power constraint  ^: ( -5, 5) 

Verbosity  0

The search loop also  included deterministic scheduling and stabilization rules to prevent unstable search -space 

drift. Operator exploration was triggered when the selected operator set remained unchanged and recent 

accuracy improvement was small. Simplicity -guided post -processing allowed expression simplification only 

when the reduction in accuracy remained within the specified tolerance.  Hyperparameter settings of this part is 

included in Supplementary Table 3. 

Supplementary Table  3 | LLM -PySR search -scheduling and simplification settings 

Hyperparameter  Value 

operator_stagnation_window  2

llm_b_stagnation_eps  0.015 

val_acc_stagnation_eps  0.01 

operator_same_jaccard_threshold  1.0 

operator_explore_budget_default  2

operator_explore_budget_hard  3

operator_explore_hard_iter  6

operator_explore_hard_score  0.85 

operator_explore_hard_acc  0.85 

operator_explore_cooldown_rounds  1

operator_last_explore_round  8Hyperparameter  Value 

simplify_acc_drop_tol  0.01 

simplify_val_acc_drop_tol  0.01 

Standalone PySR  baseline . The no -LLM baseline used PySR with a fixed numerical search space and no 

language -model planning, review or memory. Its core search settings were matched to the PySR component 

used inside the controlled LLM -PySR variants wherever possible.  Hyperparameter settings of  standalone 

PySR  is included in Supplementary Table 4. 

Supplementary Table  4 | Standalone PySR baseline settings 

Hyperparameter  Value 

niterations  200 

population_size  128 

populations  1

maxsize  30 

maxdepth  20 

random_state  0

Deterministic mode  True 

Parallelism  serial 

procs  0

Verbosity  0

Progress display  False 

Timeout  disabled unless explicitly set 

The standalone PySR baseline used the following operator set: 

Binary operators = {+,  -, ×, /,  ^}

Unary operators = { √⋅, log, exp, sin, cos, tanh, | ⋅|} 

The power operator was constrained by ( -3, 3). 

Full -stack LLM baselines.  We evaluated two full -stack LLM -based symbolic -regression baselines, LLM -SR 

and DrSR. These methods use the language model to generate or refine candidate equation structures directly, 

rather than using the language model only to constrain a separate symbolic -regression engine. For LLM -SR, we used the original program -skeleton evolution framework with GPT -5.1 as the API model. 

The maximum number of generated samples was set to 2,500, with four samples generated per prompt. 

Hyperparameter settings of LLM -SR is included in Supplementary Table 5. 

Supplementary Table  5 | LLM -SR baseline settings 

Component  Hyperparameter  Value 

LLM model  api_model  gpt -5.1 

API mode  use_api  True 

Maximum generated samples  max_samples  2,500 

Samples per prompt  samples_per_prompt  4

Samplers  num_samplers  1

Evaluators  num_evaluators  1

Evaluation timeout  evaluate_timeout_seconds  30 s 

Experience -buffer islands  num_islands  10 

Functions per prompt  functions_per_prompt  2

Island reset period  reset_period  4 h 

Cluster sampling temperature initialization  — 0.1 

Cluster sampling temperature period  — 30,000 

GPT -5.1 endpoint  — Responses API 

GPT -5.1 output limit  max_output_tokens  512 

For non -GPT -5 chat -completions fallback calls, the output limit was set to max_tokens = 512. GPT -5 output 

repair was enabled by default using gpt -4o -mini as the repair model with a maximum of 512 output tokens. 

DrSR was evaluated using the modified DrSR framework. The main model was GPT -5.1, and the extractor 

model was GPT -4o -mini. DrSR  was run for 10 iterations with four samples per iteration.  Hyperparameter 

settings of DrSR is included in Supplementary Table  6.

Supplementary Table  6 | DrSR baseline settings. 

Component  Hyperparameter  Value 

Main LLM model  — openai/gpt -5.1 

Extractor model  — openai/gpt -4o -mini Component  Hyperparameter  Value 

Iterations  niterations  10 

Samples per iteration  samples_per_iteration  4

Total generated samples  — 40 

Seed  seed  0

Samplers  num_samplers  1

Evaluators  num_evaluators  1

Evaluation timeout  — 30 s 

Islands  — 10 

Functions per  prompt  — 2

Reset period  — 4 h 

Cluster sampling temperature initialization  — 0.1 

Cluster sampling temperature period  — 30,000 

The main DrSR LLM sampling configuration was :

temperature=0.6,  top_p=0.3,  frequency_penalty=0.5,  n=1. 

Streaming was disabled and the request timeout was 120 s. The maximum generation length was set to 4,090 

tokens; for GPT -5.1 this value was passed as max_completion_tokens = 4090. The extractor model used 

temperature = 0, top_p = 0.3 and a maximum output length of 4,090 tokens. 

Equation author variant.  The  equation author  variant reused the outer LLM -PySR pipeline but replaced 

PySR -based expression enumeration with direct LLM generation of candidate equation skeletons. At each 

iteration, the language model proposed a set of candidate skeletons, which were subsequently fitted by 

numerical least -squares optimization. Thus, this variant transferred structural -generation authority from PySR 

to the language model while preserving the same general task interface and evaluation protocol. 

The outer -loop settings matched LLM -PySR: 

model=gpt -5.1,  temperature=0.1,  max_iterations=10,  target_score=0.99,  target_acc=0.99,  τ=0.1. 

The same limits on custom operators and engineered features were used: 

max_custom_ops=3,  max_engineered_features=3. 

All hyperparameter settings of equation author is included in Supplementary Table  7.

Supplementary Table  7 | Equation author  settings Hyperparameter  Value 

AI -Feynman author_skeleton_count  200 

Battery default author_skeleton_count  20 

Skeleton constants  (𝑐 0, 𝑐 1, … )

Maximum fitted constants  8

Constant optimizer  scipy.optimize.least_squares 

Optimizer initializations  all -ones and all -zeros 

max_nfev  2,500 

Runner backend  llm_author_numeric_fit 

PySR usage  disabled 

Candidate decider variant.  The  candidate decider  variant reused the LLM -PySR  outer loop and PySR -based 

candidate generation but replaced deterministic candidate -retention gates with direct LLM -based candidate 

labels. Thus, this variant preserved numerical expression enumeration but transferred final candidate -

acceptance authority to the LLM reviewer. 

The main settings matched LLM -PySR: 

model=gpt -5.1,  temperature=0.1,  max_iterations=10,  target_score=0.99,  target_acc=0.99,  τ=0.1. 

The PySR component used :

population_size=128,  initial  niterations=200,  dynamic  niterations  ∈ [100,500], maxsize=30, 

default  maxdepth=20,  LLM -recommended  maxdepth  ∈ [6,40],  maxsize=30,  default maxdepth=20,  LLM -

recommended maxdepth  ∈ [6,40],  maxsize=30,  default  maxdepth=20 

with the power operator constrained to (−5,5). 

The candidate -decider -specific differences were as follows: 

metric  hard  gate  for  candidate  survival=disabled, 

LLM -B labels  used  directly=enabled, 

post -ablation  prune=disabled. 

The constant -formula hard prefilter was disabled or relaxed relative to the main LLM -PySR  pipeline. 

Consequently, differences between the candidate -decider variant and the search -controller configuration 

primarily reflect the replacement of deterministic numerical retention with LLM -based candidate acceptance. 

Supplementary Note 4.  Complete evaluation results across role specifications 

This section provides the complete numerical results underlying the role -specification comparisons reported in 

the main text. We report results for six evaluated configurations representing five role specifications: search controller (LLM -PySR), equation author, candidate decider, full -stack LLM search represented by LLM -SR 

and DrSR, and no -LLM numerical search represented by PySR. The results cover three task categories: the AI -

Feynman symbolic -regression benchmark, the complex -formula recovery stress -test suite and the lithium -ion 

battery cycle -life prediction task. For each task, we report the relevant predictive metrics, expression -level 

outcomes and language -model token usage where applicable, using the evaluation protocol and computational 

settings described in the Methods and Supplementary Note  3. These  results  are intended to make the aggregate 

trends shown in the main figures directly traceable to the underlying per -task and per -configuration results. 

Token usages are only  recorded  for problems in the AI -Feynman dataset group. 

All experiment results 

================================================= 

Dataset group: ai_feynman 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Problem: I.10.7 

Ground truth: m_0/sqrt(1 -v**2/c**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.556511650518845/(m_0*(m_0 + 0.80697)*(m_0**2 + m_0 +

0.45036688)*log(m_0))**0.4325141 + 0.9998649 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.0330568911242 

Token usage: 227493 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * m_0 / np.sqrt(np.abs(1  - 1 * m_0 ** 2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.41406943028e -29 

Token usage: 2404068 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.0184493836694)*m_0 + (1.12646772451) 

ACC: 0.992666666667 

NMSE: 0.417091316677 

Token usage: 833057 

Role: pysr 

Formula:  -m_0 + m_0 + (cos( -1.2779886/(m_0*0.81068975  - 0.025795003))**( -2.1473446))**0.18475686 

+ 8.999759e -5

ACC: 1 NMSE: 1.77575114336e -07 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.991774398306 + 0.943184511048/m_0**3 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.384788829816 

Token usage: 176417 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: ((m_0  - (1.0 / m_0))/m_0)**( -0.5) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.78949967644e -30 

Token usage: 222881 

Problem: I.11.19 

Ground truth: x1*y1+x2*y2+x3*y3 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (x1 + x2 + x3)*((x1 + x2 + x3)*3.5334787**(y1 + y2)*( -1.0813193e -5) + (y1 +

y2)*(1.8386748**(y1 + y2)*0.0020379394 + 0.2760418) + 0.43710488) 

ACC: 0.808 

NMSE: 0.0193507966018 

Token usage: 277505 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: x1 * y1 + x2 * y2 + x3 * 1 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.8005060866e -32 

Token usage: 2487613 

Role: drsr 

Formula: x1*y1 + x2*y2 + x3*(1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.1264435255e -27 

Token usage: 5370644 

Role: pysr 

Formula: y1 + Abs(y1*y1) + Abs(y2*(y1 + 0.61043763)  - 0.6104376*Abs(y2))  - 1*7.965893e -8ACC: 0.150666666667 

NMSE: 0.337742181591 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.0741245527893)*((x1 + x2 + x3) + (y1 + y2) + (1.58813446101))**2 + ( -0.264652429514) 

ACC: 0.756 

NMSE: 0.0255110709491 

Token usage: 674723 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.415497289192669*(x1 + x2 + x3)  - 0.0890421270500248*(y1 + y2)*log(Abs(0.2581268*(y1 + 

y2)  - 1.6454614)) + 0.29641294*((x1 + x2 + x3) * (y1 + y2)) 

ACC: 0.808 

NMSE: 0.0196348161803 

Token usage: 367685 

Problem: I.12.1 

Ground truth: mu*Nn 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (mu) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.98097516372e -32 

Token usage: 14083 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * mu 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.6304758773e -32 

Token usage: 1409953 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (1) * mu 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.42173916209e -26 

Token usage: 2817843 

Role: pysr Formula: mu 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.6304758773e -32 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: mu 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.98097516372e -32 

Token usage: 131517 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: mu 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.98097516372e -32 

Token usage: 22060 

Problem: I.12.11 

Ground truth: q*(Ef+B*v*sin(theta)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula:  -(-0.24217002)*q*Ef + ((q/Ef)*( -0.20604692) + (q*exp( -Ef)))*(exp(Ef*(Ef  - 3.9435272)*( -

0.16027664) + Ef)  - 0.6608032) + 1.0002487 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.71293080304e -07 

Token usage: 215599 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: q * ( -6.1942977 * Ef + 0.18101422 + 0.60481135 * Ef ** 2 + 15.188266 * np.tanh(0.44891642 * 

Ef)) 

ACC: 0.236666666667 

NMSE: 0.0341940855638 

Token usage: 1996290 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.636640149892) * q * Ef + (2.00203453924) * q + (0.927181450856) 

ACC: 0.237333333333 

NMSE: 0.0499924193516 

Token usage: 3345142 Role: pysr 

Formula: q  - (q  - 1*1.0000001) + sin(Ef)*Abs(q) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.43705562199e -16 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.932930192796) + ( -1.4779484783)*(q/Ef) + ( -0.864629135597)*(q*Ef) + (3.27943370869)*q 

ACC: 0.512 

NMSE: 0.0244770251052 

Token usage: 629566 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (q/Ef)*0.01817552 + (q*Ef)*((Ef*log(1.0/Ef))*(0.01771666*Ef**2*log(1.0/Ef**2) +

(Ef*log(1.0/Ef))*(0.013291213*Ef*log(1.0/Ef)  - 0.05243208) + 0.26935017) + 0.82348585) + 1.0001794 

ACC: 0.996 

NMSE: 1.0084349362e -07 

Token usage: 100469 

Problem: I.12.2 

Ground truth: q1*q2*r/(4*pi*epsilon*r**3) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.04579208*q1 + 0.03378539*(q1^2)/q1 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.23515038843e -15 

Token usage: 92683 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: q1 * 1 / (4.0 * np.pi * 1 * 1 ** 2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.49666346933e -30 

Token usage: 1909260 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.0795774715459) * q1 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.49390713108e -25 Token usage: 3283374 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 0.07957747*Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(q1)))))))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.23175190587e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.0795774715459*q1  - 2.76187268551e -17 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.17320883676e -24 

Token usage: 246885 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: q1*0.061423615 + (q1^2)*0.018153857*q1/(q1*q1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.06547230581e -16 

Token usage: 45541 

Problem: I.13.12 

Ground truth: G*m1*m2*(1/r2 -1/r1) 

Role: search controller 

Formula:  -m1 + (m1/m2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.04776256175e -32 

Token usage: 196584 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 23.652959 * m1 * m2 * (1.0 / np.where(np.abs( -2.3741587e -05 * m1 + 1.0509055 * m2 +  -

0.021647818) < 1e -12, 1e -12, np.abs (-2.3741587e -05 * m1 + 1.0509055 * m2 +  -0.021647818))  - 1.0 / 

np.where(np.abs( -2.6909588e -05 * m1 + 1.0061226 * m2 + 0.023154515) < 1e -12, 1e -12, np.abs( -

2.6909588e -05 * m1 + 1.0061226 * m2 + 0.023154515))) 

ACC: 0.992666666667 

NMSE: 6.55776173982e -07 

Token usage: 2143314 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -1.12657017243)*m1*m2 + (1.57325822431)*m1 + (0.355990288159)*m2 + ( -0.463759833238) ACC: 0.0706666666667 

NMSE: 0.499923920097 

Token usage: 4278799 

Role: pysr 

Formula: m1*m2*( -1.290167e -9*(m1*m1*0.85080326/(m2*1.1583954)  - (-m1 + exp(m2))) + (1.0  -

m2)/m2)/m2 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.85747604814e -16 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula:  -m1 + m1/m2  - 5.50896127533e -17 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.1717647379e -32 

Token usage: 219369 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula:  -m1 + (m1/m2) + ( -m1/m2 + (m1/m2))/( -2.2574642) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.04776256175e -32 

Token usage: 86182 

Problem: I.13.4 

Ground truth: 1/2*m*(v**2+u**2+w**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: m*m*0.5  - 1*2.0119255 + 2.5119255  - (-0.5)*(m*v^2)/m 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.67699995898e -32 

Token usage: 34186 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -8.3226902e -07 * m ** 0.4549554 * v ** 0.4722072 + 0.50000106 * m ** 1.9999987 + 

0.49999945 * v ** 2.0000006 + 0.50000017 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.11503467753e -13 

Token usage: 1998914 

Role: drsr Formula: (0.198480862452) * m * v**2 + (1.34819128178) * m + (0.225414788911) 

ACC: 0.356666666667 

NMSE: 0.0556956419287 

Token usage: 2577666 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (m*0.6259615*m + (v*0.7910877)**2.0000765  - Abs(m) + Abs(m) + 0.6259769)*0.7988279 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.93696222306e -09 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.5) + (0.5)*m**2 + (0.5)*v**2 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.47402967001e -32 

Token usage: 355577 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (m*m  - 1.0331264 + (m*v^2)/m)*0.5 + 1.0165632 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.05732292762e -32 

Token usage: 74429 

Problem: I.15.10 

Ground truth: N/A 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (0.9469867  - (1/x1)/1.1138612)**((1/x1)*( -0.4178485))*0.9983383 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.28878775601e -06 

Token usage: 130307 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -0.0019433847 * np.power(x1, 0.75006299) + 0.00085939736 * x1 + 1.002487 + 1.6205675 / ( -

2.6340272 +  3.2928628 * x1 ** 2 + 1e -12) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.64240324464e -07 

Token usage: 1903344 Role: drsr 

Formula: (1.27213808202) + ( -0.0843091281038)*x1 + (0.00652560532314)*x1**2 

ACC: 0.995333333333 

NMSE: 0.170760313448 

Token usage: 3753930 

Role: pysr 

Formula: ((cos( -0.0011446376 + 1.6726881/x1)**( -1.2810452))**0.23908037)**1.1767702  - 1*8.323509e -

6

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.01456063875e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.00038474489999*x1**2  - 0.30463280989609)/(x1**2  - 0.797340129815) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.69249717446e -05 

Token usage: 263457 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: exp(((1/x1)*((1/x1)  - 1*( -0.22783926))*( -(1/x1) + (1/x1) + (1/x1)  - 0.011835406)  - 1*( -

1.3273357))*0.38285336*((1/x1)*(1/x1)  - 0.00029379525)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.98856368767e -07 

Token usage: 109499 

Problem: I.15.3t 

Ground truth: (t -u*x/c**2)/sqrt(1 -u**2/c**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.548663146504462*c*x**2 + 0.999429*c  - 0.999429*x 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.07033640346e -05 

Token usage: 274919 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: ( -39.110938 * x + 39.111138 * c +  -3.9571999e -05) / np.sqrt(np.abs(1529.681 + 0.024240109 * ( -

63105.132 * x ** 2 + 2.5056273e -05 * c ** 2 +  -0.0048305271 * x * c)) + 1e -12) 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 7.69008813072e -15 

Token usage: 3091249 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.775822182987)*x + (1.03007193762)*c + ( -0.443431578139) 

ACC: 0.966 

NMSE: 0.000648099864631 

Token usage: 1693471 

Role: pysr 

Formula: c + 0.18425639*sqrt(((1.1464193**c + c - 0.540304114)**1.7156944)**(2*x))  - tanh(x)  -

0.244920245243679 

ACC: 0.999333333333 

NMSE: 7.44297808586e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.792517169426*c*x**3 + 0.988815475691*c  - 1.19865571926*x + 0.0364888628601 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.00271186950732 

Token usage: 332919 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (x*(x*((tanh(x))*x*0.9208847  - 1*( -0.005351937))  - 1*( -0.5114914))*(x*x*tanh(tanh(x)) + (x*c)  -

1.9730119) + c)*0.99986887 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.29496519902e -09 

Token usage: 81827 

Problem: I.15.3x 

Ground  truth: (x -u*t)/sqrt(1 -u**2/c**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: ( -(u  - 1)*(x**2  - 0.74894035) + 0.348263423466737)/(x**2  - 0.74894035) 

ACC: 0.992 

NMSE: 0.00413743495921 

Token usage: 212853 

Role: llmsr Formula: 0.00028879268 * (x  - u * (3187.0399 + 42.855371 * x)) / np.sqrt(np.where(1.0  - u ** 2 / 

np.log1p(np.exp(331.88164)) <= 0.0, np.finfo(float).eps, 1.0  - u ** 2 / np.log1p(np.exp(331.88164)))) + 

1.0155968 

ACC: 0.989333333333 

NMSE: 0.0232821506335 

Token usage: 2930547 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (( -0.00345838823763)*x + (-1.04886163848)*u + (1.04869610445)) / np.sqrt(1  -

(0.206687528127)*u**2) 

ACC: 0.986 

NMSE: 0.0236721180846 

Token usage: 2743501 

Role: pysr 

Formula:  -u + (2.3477335/(u + log(x + log((x/(0.029605785**re(u) + x))**1.469732))))**(0.1958292/x) + 

0.00549959999999983 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.47814285448e -05 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -0.378373650696)*log(u*u + (0.130532690459)) + (0.141521807637) 

ACC: 0.976 

NMSE: 0.0425722033714 

Token usage: 605511 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (1.785267e -5*x + 0.99928033)*(0.296013441991912*(1  - u)/(x  - 0.56212294)**1.767653 + (1  - u)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.78743757657e -06 

Token usage: 83007 

Problem: I.16.6 

Ground truth: (u+v)/(1+u*v/c**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (c + v)/((c*v) + 1.0) 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 1.04230336918e -30 

Token usage: 41011 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -0.55941743 * (2.1369066 + (0.52806949 * v +  -0.51268682)) / (1.0 + 2.1369066 * (0.52806949 * 

v +  -0.51268682) / ((1.0986992 * c + 0.99040695) ** 2 + 1e -12)) + 2.1905149 

ACC: 0.950666666667 

NMSE: 0.09078006754 

Token usage: 2172335 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ((0.999999999993)*c + (1)*v) / (1 + ((0.780136202743)/( -0.883253192886)**2)*c*v) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.89237751549e -22 

Token usage: 3856387 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 0.3638521 + 1/((0.909352154008556*((v**1.941972)**log(c))**0.4010189 +

0.664364)*((v**3.3756464)**log(c))**0.08377571) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000513468514087 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -1.43924116543)*log((0.788081327184) + v) + (0.605623433828)*log(( -0.179664403233) + c) + 

(1.99984482952)*log((1.59740546324) + (v/c)) 

ACC: 0.952 

NMSE: 0.0880965916924 

Token usage: 879617 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (-0.00202387462453274*(log(c)*log(v))**2 + 0.035340034*(log(c)*log(v)) +

0.017670017*log((v/c))**2 + 0.0882449107409221)**(0.2058618*(log(c)*log(v))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.04946859755e -08 

Token usage: 259783 

Problem: I.18.12 

Ground truth: r*F*sin(theta) Role: search controller 

Formula: sin(r) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.10197511618e -32 

Token usage: 37079 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: r * ( -1.028954 * (1.0 +  -0.15385866 * r +  -0.0009851815 * r ** 2)) * np.sin(4.3720904 + 

0.60894871 * r) + 0.003687825 

ACC: 0.994666666667 

NMSE: 1.30171510295e -06 

Token usage: 1640043 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -2.04972991961e -12)*r + ( -0.999999999999)*np.sin(( -1)*r) + (5.55017911494e -12) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.04054424712e -23 

Token usage: 2664173 

Role: pysr 

Formula:  -4.7519912e -9*( -r*cos(r + 0.94886833) + r)*cos(r*(r  - cos(r*(r + 0.88444185))  - 0.34979773)) + 

sin(r) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.33970485833e -16 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.17858639619e -17) + (1)*sin((1)*r) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.09016030142e -32 

Token usage: 135797 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: sin(r) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.10197511618e -32 

Token usage: 57997 

Problem: I.18.14 Ground truth: m*r*v*sin(theta) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: sin((m)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.74396362456e -32 

Token usage: 35865 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 2.9443523 * m +  -1.2489133 * m ** 2 + 0.13277453 * m ** 3 +  -1.0422548 

ACC: 0.994 

NMSE: 0.000198786171338 

Token usage: 1652161 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.360299970221)*m + ( -0.0490439924564)*m**2 + (1.64985812921) 

ACC: 0.202666666667 

NMSE: 0.0420795243733 

Token usage: 3224210 

Role: pysr 

Formula: sin(m)  - 4.6038623e -10/( -1.79074852751225*sin(cos(m))  - Abs(0.408422788815358*m  -

exp(cos(cos(m))))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.66410054702e -14 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: sin(m) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.74396362456e -32 

Token usage: 164312 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: sin((m)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.74396362456e -32 

Token usage: 51196 Problem: I.18.4 

Ground truth: (m1*r1+m2*r2)/(m1+m2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: m2  - (m2  - 1.0)/(m1 + 1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.46432192688e -31 

Token usage: 34718 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: (np.abs (1.2630128) * m1 * (9.3389608e -06 * m1 + 1.0000417 * m2 +  -6.4190521e -05) + 

np.abs(1.1394165e -05) * m2 * (0.71286467 * m1 + 0.80955041 * m2 + 0.58653743) + 1.2631996) / 

(np.abs(1.2630128) * m1 + np.abs(1.1394165e -05) * m2 + (1e -12 + np.abs(1.2631967))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.09615245416e -10 

Token usage: 2624077 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.0382975284867)*m1 + (0.506344753968)*m2 + (0.447014992872) 

ACC: 0.780666666667 

NMSE: 0.082246752346 

Token usage: 2352649 

Role: pysr 

Formula: log(( -m1/tanh(tanh(m2)  - 2.3420203/tanh(m2)))**(0.21564841*m2  - 0.21712689549896)*(m2 + 

m2**(0.29388472*m2) + 0.73123384))**1.0610108 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000534252358725 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.702610726085) + (-0.180988390233)*(m1 + m2) + (0.177150861956)*(m1 * m2) +

(0.482618813875)*m2 

ACC: 0.98 

NMSE: 0.0228337555338 

Token usage: 699963 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: m2*(1.0  - m2)/(m2 + (m1 * m2)) + m2 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 2.68714185819e -31 

Token usage: 58293 

Problem: I.24.6 

Ground truth: 1/2*m*(omega**2+omega_0**2)*1/2*x**2 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (m^2)*0.25  - 1*( -0.25) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.711822564e -31 

Token usage: 22311 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.24999999 * m ** 2 + 0.25 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.39481347241e -15 

Token usage: 1925257 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ((0.249999999994) + (8.28099787339e -12)*m + (0.249999999997)*m**2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.16095646498e -23 

Token usage: 3216269 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (m*0.49617767)**2.0006974 + tanh(Abs(tanh(((m + m)**1.9554809  -

1*0.3542039)*0.001013153))) + 0.25035742 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.36505245495e -13 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.25*m**2 + 0.25 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.711822564e -31 

Token usage: 268815 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.25  - (-0.25)*(m^2) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.711822564e -31 

Token usage: 37412 

Problem: I.26.2 

Ground truth: arcsin(n*sin(theta2)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: n*sin(theta2)/cos(1.51743065000508*n*sin(theta2))**0.117128134 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000720026568902 

Token usage: 222520 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: np.arcsin(n * np.sin(theta2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.34687123404e -32 

Token usage: 1763281 

Role: drsr 

Formula: np.arcsin(n * np.sin(theta2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.34687123404e -32 

Token usage: 4658929 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 

sin(sin(n*sin(theta2)*cos(sin(theta2*sin(n)/n)*tanh(sin(sin(n))*0.29134652))))/cos(n*sin(theta2/1.0063514)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000148532230077 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (112.59425522)*sin((0.814123492775)*(n * sin(theta2))) + ( -90.6509581922)*(n * sin(theta2)) + 

(10.149238147)*(n * sin(theta2))**3 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000527363160335 

Token usage: 823839 

Role: candidate decider Formula: (n * sin(theta2))/((0.42852435  - cos((n * sin(theta2))/( -0.12562138)))*7.0495684e -5 + ((n * 

sin(theta2))*(n * sin(theta2))*(n * sin(theta2))*4.833402e -5 + cos((n * sin(theta2))*1.3278909)*cos((n * 

sin(theta2))*1.5401679))**0.081007995) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.4051683118e -05 

Token usage: 177334 

Problem: I.27.6 

Ground truth: 1/(1/d1+n/d2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (d1 / (d1 + d2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.89928442641e -31 

Token usage: 20017 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: (54.96863 * np.where(d1 == 0, 1e -12, d1) + 0.045954705 * np.where(d2 == 0, 1e -12, d2)) / (1.0 / 

np.where(d1 == 0, 1e -12, d1) +  -1.8457258 / np.where(d2 == 0, 1e -12, d2) + 55.147017 * np.where (d1 == 0, 

1e -12, d1) + 54.852565 * np.where(d2 == 0, 1e -12, d2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.49708522655e -05 

Token usage: 2343543 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.144281140604)*d1 + ( -0.0683592277186)*d2 + (0.319294616983) 

ACC: 0.554666666667 

NMSE: 0.0821572844757 

Token usage: 2273857 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs(sin(tanh((d1/d2 +

tanh((((d1*1.5744494/d2)**1.3395746)**1.0727283)**0.5388396))*0.3243752)**1.0712736)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.88666756255e -05 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -1.94678438981e -17) + (1)*(d1/(d1 + d2)) 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 1.63503704318e -31 

Token usage: 235876 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (d1 / d2)/((d1 / d2) + 1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.88748130879e -31 

Token usage: 56104 

Problem: I.29.16 

Ground truth: sqrt(x1**2+x2**2 -2*x1*x2*cos(theta1 -theta2)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 1.7103646  - cos((x1 * cos(theta1))) 

ACC: 0.176 

NMSE: 0.956495957259 

Token usage: 114389 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.60991721 * np.sqrt(np.maximum((1.639566 * x1 + 1.0809302e -06) ** 2 + ( -1.1137104e -07 * x2 

+ 1.6395672) ** 2  - 2.0 * (1.639566 * x1 + 1.0809302e -06) * ( -1.1137104e -07 * x2 + 1.6395672) * 

np.cos(theta1  - (0.99999981 * x2 + 4.34131e -07)), 0.0)) + 1.4847075e -07 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.06920144069e -13 

Token usage: 3273284 

Role: drsr 

Formula: np.sqrt(np.abs((0.0964392826535)*x1**2 + (-0.234820263583)*x2**2  - (-

0.722956772092)*x1*x2*np.cos(theta1 + (1.89231968473)) + (2.01585087331))) 

ACC: 0.219333333333 

NMSE: 0.403531867652 

Token usage: 4688748 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs(1.94664609035794*(theta1*( -2.424934*cos(0.7028877*theta1) + 2.424934*Abs(theta1  -

Abs(theta1))) + 2.6146412)**0.326922835  - 1.83044825458456) 

ACC: 0.0653333333333 

NMSE: 2.66547189456 

Token usage: 0 Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.45792395287) + ( -0.806334655287)*cos(x2  - theta1) 

ACC: 0.24 

NMSE: 0.559348185584 

Token usage: 880694 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: ( -cos(( -(x1 * sin(theta1)) + sin(x2))*0.57857496) + 2.0996337 + sin( -(x1 * cos(theta1)) + cos(x2)  -

1*1.5824449)/(2.1122534  - cos(((x1 * sin(theta1))  - sin(x2))/0.9239847)))*1.5185791 

ACC: 0.896 

NMSE: 0.0292010770257 

Token usage: 252726 

Problem: I.30.3 

Ground truth: Int_0*sin(n*theta/2)**2/sin(theta/2)**2 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (cos(Int_0*theta)  - 1.0)/(cos(Int_0)  - 1*1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.93925988023e -31 

Token usage: 42803 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.13255171 * Int_0 * (np.sin(Int_0 * theta / 2.0) / (np.sin(theta / 2.0) + 1e -12)) ** 2 + 1.5083217 + 

-0.30216791 * Int_0 +  -0.0092870277 * theta 

ACC: 0.141333333333 

NMSE: 0.727647640734 

Token usage: 2637008 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.228403910323)*Int_0 + ( -0.0680540932062)*theta + (1.79882601858) 

ACC: 0.121333333333 

NMSE: 0.927850850018 

Token usage: 2404280 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (tanh(cos( -Int_0 + sin(tanh(tanh(sin(Abs( -theta + sin(Abs(cos(Int_0))) + 2*cos(Int_0)))))))  -

1*1.5134357) + 1.7751732)**6.198205  - 1*( -0.30971614) 

ACC: 0.143333333333 NMSE: 0.415449161902 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.47809224717) + ( -0.0617469671436)*Int_0*theta + ( -0.1094294182)*(Int_0*sin(theta)) 

ACC: 0.176 

NMSE: 0.873921839149 

Token usage: 921607 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (1.0  - cos(Int_0*theta))/(1.0  - cos(Int_0)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.93925988023e -31 

Token usage: 67247 

Problem: I.30.5 

Ground truth: arcsin(lambd/(n*d)) 

Role: search  controller 

Formula: asin(1.0/(lambd*d)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.87032363959e -31 

Token usage: 32790 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: np.arcsin(np.clip(((1.0 +  -0.99996539) * lambd + 4.5968106) / ((np.abs (0.00065282601) + 1e -09 + 

3.3891966 * lambd +  -0.00010282878 * d) * ((1.0 + 0.35607349) * d + 0.0001445274 + 1e -12) + 1e -12),  -1.0, 

1.0)) +  -1.5990618e -05 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.91098305512e -09 

Token usage: 2701221 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.081178856795)*lambd + ( -0.0759522582068)*d + (0.612588261306) 

ACC: 0.251333333333 

NMSE: 0.262757153949 

Token usage: 3024407 

Role: pysr Formula: 1.04379528134315*Abs(1/((1.05005320094543*lambd  - 0.0665561/(d*sqrt(tanh((d  -

d**(1.0567045/d)/lambd)**1.2292547))))*Abs(d))) 

ACC: 0.999333333333 

NMSE: 0.00787694904717 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 18.6817256265317/(d*(19.0006057021*lambd  - 1.05188144258646)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.00219163003111 

Token usage: 779912 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: asin((1/(d*lambd))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.87032363959e -31 

Token usage: 49182 

Problem: I.32.17 

Ground truth: (1/2*epsilon*c*Ef**2)*(8*pi*r**2/3)*(omega**4/(omega**2 -omega_0**2)**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (-39.16474**(epsilon/c)*(0.0043715024*c**3  -

epsilon**3)*(0.06672978*33.0629090916447**(epsilon**2/c**2)*epsilon + 0.53874665*c) +

0.003023708*c**4)/c**4 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000317683649541 

Token usage: 221805 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.8033919 * np.power(epsilon, 3.0150625) * np.power(c,  -0.14598942) * np.power(np.abs( -

1.2846162 * epsilon + 1.4580775 * c), 0.49829235) / np.power(( -1.2846162 * epsilon + 1.4580775 * c  -

0.10321213) ** 2 + 0.12673456, 1.6521703) +  -0.0051034866 

ACC: 0.95 

NMSE: 2.21648684147e -05 

Token usage: 2268525 

Role: drsr Formula: (( -0.459644642796) * epsilon * c + (2.04954091189) * epsilon + (1.83970377306) * c + ( -

9.7758624815)) * (( -0.0207963937305) + ( -0.417501064625) * epsilon**2 + ( -0.0340181645577) * c**2 + 

(0.243876516184) * epsilon * c) 

ACC: 0.160666666667 

NMSE: 0.0860171550997 

Token usage: 3296974 

Role: pysr 

Formula: c*(0.44629234*epsilon/c +

0.8206506)**20.783756*tanh(epsilon*tanh(sin(sin(0.380985033935125/(c**2*sqrt(tanh(c))))))) 

ACC: 0.845333333333 

NMSE: 0.000147067503571 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (-1.56178934817) + (14.3158644944)*(epsilon / c) + (-43.712900762)*(epsilon / c)**2 +

(46.4456190833)*(epsilon / c)**3 

ACC: 0.684 

NMSE: 0.00313232731883 

Token usage: 632702 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (epsilon / c)*( -0.0016248347 + exp( -1.6351923*(epsilon / c)))*( -0.0003679246*(epsilon /

c)/(epsilon + 1.8052094) + 4.21716296695648*( -(epsilon / c)/log((epsilon / c)))**2.1078687  -

0.00124843435079141*exp((epsilon / c))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.59782924006e -09 

Token usage: 255741 

Problem: I.34.1 

Ground truth: omega_0/(1 -v/c) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: c/(c  - (c^2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.74411690782e -31 

Token usage: 27766 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 / (1  - 1 * c) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.46165550485e -31 

Token usage: 1822728 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (2.28903640374)*c + (0.791800748771) 

ACC: 0.985333333333 

NMSE: 0.0591951470987 

Token usage: 2030302 

Role: pysr 

Formula: exp(Abs(c*exp(c*(0.24089126*c*exp(0.6692112*0.329027383222828**(0.6192171  - c)*c) +

0.491311286947938)) + 0.00019104838)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.8706835275e -08 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (( -1.05562430904) + ( -1.05562430904)*c)/(( -1.05562430904) + (1.05562430904)*(c^2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.89969584092e -31 

Token usage: 194555 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: c/(c  - (c^2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.74411690782e -31 

Token usage: 39390 

Problem: I.34.14 

Ground truth: (1+v/c)/sqrt(1 -v**2/c**2)*omega_0 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 2.04233791776762**(c**2) + c 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.0109329606404 

Token usage: 174612 

Role: llmsr Formula: 1.6076562 * c + 0.9042283 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.0193776398921 

Token usage: 2328949 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (((0.855440205872) + (0.8554402059)*c) / np.sqrt(1.0  - (0.999999999967)*c**2)) *

(1.16898877692) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.08458958379e -23 

Token usage: 3262504 

Role: pysr 

Formula: exp(c/cos(1.5125988*c*cos(cos(0.580287250914152*c*sqrt(cos(cos(1.2790442*c))))))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.98884178947e -09 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.35736540923*c + (c**3 + 0.327753283021)*(3.19659074851*c**3 + 0.995972030081))/(c**3 

+ 0.327753283021) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.0194303614114 

Token usage: 169251 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (c*c*(c*(c^2)*(1.189076 + (c  - 0.54759514)*( -0.028038971))*(c  - 0.567854)*exp(c) + (c^2) + 

0.89237726) + 2.718544)**c 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.34011593325e -09 

Token usage: 209902 

Problem: I.37.4 

Ground truth: I1+I2+2*sqrt(I1*I2)*cos(delta) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.8499987**log(I2) + (I1*I2)**0.51106185*((0.5472272  - 0.02131326*I2**log(I2))*(I2  -

4.3945546)*(I2  - 1.7673781) + log((I1/I2) + 1.0947772)) 

ACC: 0.924 NMSE: 0.000118856372566 

Token usage: 233977 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.0000021 * I1 +  -1.6948353e -06 * I2 + 1.9999746 * (np.power(np.maximum(I1, 0.0), 0.5 + 

1.1621737e -06) * np.power(np.maximum(I2, 0.0), 0.5 +  -0.49998998)) * np.cos( -1.0518328e -07 * I1 + 

1.0000004 * I2) + 1.0000022 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.16513509224e -11 

Token usage: 2795469 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (2.33020179842)*I1 + (0.579281732805)*I2 + (-2.22855364379)*np.sqrt(I1*I2) +

(0.693015851323) 

ACC: 0.078 

NMSE: 0.667488347802 

Token usage: 4370126 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs(Abs(I2  - 3.1757476)**(0.96274704**I1)*(I1 + 0.25996137*Abs((I1 + 3.15051)*(I2  -

3.0613482)))*0.47797874  - 0.024441684) 

ACC: 0.586666666667 

NMSE: 0.00818527208251 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -1.00071363812) + (0.0700247652587)*(I1 + (2.81592709965))**2 + (0.826532320592)*(I2 + ( -

3.12932418793))**2 

ACC: 0.316 

NMSE: 0.0837689278239 

Token usage: 919468 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (I1**0.5259134 + 0.09775204)*(0.09111284*(I2  - 3.14159265)**2 +

log(0.00573234570860954*log((I1^2))**2 + 1))*( -0.029026983*I1 + (0.122587875  -

0.0071255304*log(0.12356315*(I2  - 3.14159265)**2))*(I2  - 3.14159265)**2  - 3.14159265)**2 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.48465297099e -06 

Token usage: 88372 Problem: I.39.11 

Ground truth: 1/(gamma -1)*pr*V 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (1.0/(gamma  - 1.0)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.51841152098e -31 

Token usage: 22242 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 / (gamma  - 1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.99613236239e -31 

Token usage: 1642267 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (1) / (gamma  - 1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.67398001365e -27 

Token usage: 3277150 

Role: pysr 

Formula: gamma/(gamma*(gamma  - 0.99999994)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.09870206913e -14 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -1) + (1)*gamma/(( -1) + gamma) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.01920908435e -31 

Token usage: 174544 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (1/gamma) + ((1/gamma)/(gamma  - 1.0)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.78196621504e -31 

Token usage: 54299 Problem: I.39.22 

Ground truth: n*kb*T/V 

Role: search controller 

Formula: n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.47059121614e -31 

Token usage: 14018 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.37309181238e -31 

Token usage: 1525558 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (1) * n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.13021140276e -25 

Token usage: 2767068 

Role: pysr 

Formula: n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.37309181238e -31 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.47059121614e -31 

Token usage: 233884 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.47059121614e -31 

Token usage: 21957 Problem: I.40.1 

Ground truth: n_0*exp( -m*g*x/(kb*T)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: n_0/exp(1.0/m) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.59328730685e -32 

Token usage: 102144 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: n_0 * np.exp( -0.15856177 * m) * (1.0 +  -0.17682292 * n_0 + 0.53108426 * m) +  -1.3970285 

ACC: 0.165333333333 

NMSE: 0.128512794894 

Token usage: 2046053 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.16185394918)*n_0 + (0.641687479383)*m + ( -0.407196344329) 

ACC: 0.088 

NMSE: 0.269686620197 

Token usage: 2292219 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 0.900577179914607*n_0*tanh(0.88789976*(sqrt(m)  - 0.5256067)*tanh(1.875866*m) +

0.032344017) 

ACC: 0.712 

NMSE: 0.000132640222382 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula:  -0.0419471674014*m**2 + 0.432180017484*m*n_0  - 0.0178534691714*m**(n_0 + 1)  -

0.0111337902285*n_0**2  - 0.092133244996449 

ACC: 0.356 

NMSE: 8.05784950922 

Token usage: 875229 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (m*n_0)*exp( -1.0/m)/m 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.47731245521e -32 

Token usage: 56671 Problem: I.41.16 

Ground truth: h/(2*pi)*omega**3/(pi**2*c**2*(exp((h/(2*pi))*omega/(kb*T)) -1)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.10132118*omega  - 0.008062881 + 0.000213472140718468/omega 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.91990425776e -10 

Token usage: 184790 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.44947308 * omega ** 0.99517794 / (np.expm1(np.clip( -0.00045630863 * omega + 1.6876938 + 

0.072332023 / (omega + 1e -12),  -700.0, 700.0)) + 1e -12) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.06890531576e -07 

Token usage: 2954518 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.101209191285)*omega + ( -0.00757790637475) 

ACC: 0.987333333333 

NMSE: 2.6892793848e -06 

Token usage: 2324283 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 0.10130378*omega  - 0.007927855*tanh(omega + sqrt(tanh(tanh((omega  -

0.07782935)/(omega**sin(omega) + 0.043954488)))))**0.20084158 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.97164615697e -09 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.10118961867*omega  - 0.00772087802327 + 0.00308010977163659*exp( -

6.68379420741*omega) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.21759301119e -07 

Token usage: 175465 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: omega*0.10132118  - (0.008062888  - 0.0004277676/(omega + omega + 0.0004319953/(omega + 

0.007408765) + 0.00042778463/omega)) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.10452451729e -15 

Token usage: 194721 

Problem: I.43.43 

Ground truth: 1/(gamma -1)*kb*v/A 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (1/gamma) + gamma*(1/gamma)/(gamma*(gamma  - 1*1.0)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.11749575446e -31 

Token usage: 90036 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 / (gamma  - 1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.56576597277e -31 

Token usage: 1653157 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (1) / (gamma  - (1)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.69519418628e -26 

Token usage: 3419375 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 1/((gamma/(gamma  - 1*1.0530558))**4.210868e -8*(gamma  - sqrt(cos( -gamma + gamma)))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.41420545403e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -6.01931137497e -17) + (1)*(1/gamma)/(1 + ( -1)*(1/gamma)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.22422283344e -31 

Token usage: 112227 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (1/gamma) + gamma*(1/gamma)*(1/gamma)/(gamma*(1/gamma)*(gamma  - 1*1.0)) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.06923730625e -31 

Token usage: 41960 

Problem: I.44.4 

Ground truth: n*kb*T*ln(V2/V1) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.25*n*(log(kb) + log(kb*(kb^2))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.75523686309e -32 

Token usage: 39652 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -160.06388 * n * kb * np.log(np.abs((1.0143068e -05 * n **  -0.23695255 +  -3.4399947) / 

(0.0092690854 * kb **  -1.9537035 +  -3.4490342)) + 1e -12) 

ACC: 0.365333333333 

NMSE: 0.00870277531041 

Token usage: 1889874 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.715603651869)*n*kb + (-0.858254710425)*n + (-0.0192160198676)*kb + (-

0.000498695890964) 

ACC: 0.126666666667 

NMSE: 0.131165586336 

Token usage: 3421113 

Role: pysr 

Formula: sqrt(n)*(9.95173256370919e -9*n  - 2.8968663e -9*kb)*tanh(sqrt(n)*log(kb)) + log(kb**n) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.60175543412e -16 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (5.39969139883e -17) + (1)*n*log(kb) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.65241928955e -32 

Token usage: 341964 

Role: candidate decider Formula: n*(0.5*log(kb) + 0.25*log((kb^2))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.6140031334e -32 

Token usage: 65378 

Problem: I.47.23 

Ground truth: sqrt(gamma*pr/rho) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: gamma**0.5 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.3693895988e -31 

Token usage: 46951 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * np.sqrt(gamma) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.16733387942e -31 

Token usage: 1684319 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.999999999999)*np.sqrt(gamma) + (9.94507376182e -13) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.26389485548e -24 

Token usage: 2983960 

Role: pysr 

Formula: sqrt(gamma) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.16733387942e -31 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1)*gamma**(0.5) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.3693895988e -31 

Token usage: 85767 

Role: candidate decider Formula: sqrt(gamma) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.3693895988e -31 

Token usage: 61875 

Problem: I.48.20 

Ground truth: N/A 

Role: search controller 

Formula: x1**2 + 0.51011044 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.89118947431e -06 

Token usage: 34009 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.49923605 + 0.00014503097 * x1 + 0.99999167 * x1 ** 2 + 0.38813843 / ((x1  - -0.060946761) 

** 2 +  -0.99433131 + 1e -12) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.34120072975e -14 

Token usage: 2174663 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -379.535003783) * np.sin(( -0.0753763320694) * x1 + ( -10.9774634559)) + (380.883453656) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.54269057981e -05 

Token usage: 3824677 

Role: pysr 

Formula: x1*x1 + 0.49999908  - 0.37485936/(0.8411416  - (Abs(x1**2)  - 0.10129087/(x1**4.8704863 + 

cos( -x1  - x1 + 1.456858)))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.91014055428e -14 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.15938601543469*x1**4  - 0.419973236789545*x1**2  -

0.0689138786948)/(1.15939590561*x1**2  - 1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.18798317923e -11 Token usage: 167277 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.16231978**((x1^2)*((x1^2)  - 0.05716716)) + (x1^2)  - 1*( -0.49999878) + 0.3751118/((x1^2)  -

1*0.99935615 + 0.39309254/(1.3060099 + 0.12215829**( -0.35041705/(x1^2)))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.5654330192e -14 

Token usage: 61115 

Problem: I.50.26 

Ground truth: x1*(cos(omega*t)+alpha*cos(omega*t)**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (omega*cos(omega*(x1/omega)) + 1.0)*cos(omega*(x1/omega)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.26108535728e -31 

Token usage: 40332 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.11335305 * x1 * (np.cos( -0.1921522 * omega + 6.652209) + 1.4766192 * np.cos( -0.1921522 * 

omega + 6.652209) ** 2) + 0.52343757 * omega +  -1.3924861 

ACC: 0.0513333333333 

NMSE: 0.692739899093 

Token usage: 2393308 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.277806607845)*x1 + (0.517658722967)*omega + ( -1.38092618052) 

ACC: 0.0533333333333 

NMSE: 0.693343068419 

Token usage: 2359583 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (cos(omega)*Abs(omega) + 1.0)*(cos(omega)  - 1.5759296e -8 - 1.5759296e -8) 

ACC: 0.0586666666667 

NMSE: 1.27082560127 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.668477116001) + (0.0394376806463)*(x1^2)*cos(x1) 

ACC: 0.08 NMSE: 0.506781595951 

Token usage: 600497 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (x1*omega)*0.09522436 

ACC: 0.056 

NMSE: 0.655605520178 

Token usage: 241964 

Problem: I.6.2 

Ground truth: exp( -(theta/sigma)**2/2)/(sqrt(2*pi)*sigma) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.349663064670883*log(Abs(0.21498056**(sigma/theta)*( -0.010379398) +

(sigma/theta)**(0.21537578 + 1.1628271/(sigma/theta))) + 1)*Abs(theta*(1/(sigma*theta))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.24611774675e -06 

Token usage: 236231 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.0 / np.sqrt(2.0 * np.pi * np.where(sigma == 0, 1e -12, sigma) ** 2) * np.exp( -0.5 * (theta / 

np.where(sigma == 0, 1e -12, sigma)) ** 2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.19684124305e -30 

Token usage: 2535981 

Role: drsr 

Formula: np.exp( -0.5*(theta/sigma)**2)/(np.sqrt(2*np.pi)*sigma) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.503851621e -30 

Token usage: 3841066 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 0.239578709464241*Abs(sin((theta + tanh((sigma*( -0.16107258) +

theta)**theta))/(0.799245*(sigma + 0.39649627))))/Abs(theta) 

ACC: 0.957333333333 

NMSE: 0.00350923251231 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author Formula: (0.208658759264) + ( -0.0192634109085)*(sigma + theta) + (0.233515077)*(cos(theta) / sigma) + 

(-0.0725964205601)*cos(theta) 

ACC: 0.904 

NMSE: 0.0295762168048 

Token usage: 792097 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: ((theta/sigma)*( -0.0020556143)*Abs((theta/sigma)**(theta/sigma)  - 2.618656) +

0.535066)/((((1.3683693*(theta/sigma))**((theta/sigma)  - 1*( -0.19024964)) +

0.7439906)*Abs(theta)/Abs((theta/sigma)))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.66355918471e -06 

Token usage: 228678 

Problem: I.6.2a 

Ground truth: exp( -theta**2/2)/sqrt(2*pi) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.60653067**(theta^2)*0.39894226 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.3527743597e -15 

Token usage: 28753 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * (1.0 / np.sqrt(2.0 * np.pi * np.where(np.abs(1) < 1e -12, 1e -12, 1) ** 2)) * np.exp (-0.5 * (theta / 

np.where(np.abs(1) < 1e -12, 1e -12, 1)) ** 2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.47532743918e -31 

Token usage: 1933901 

Role: drsr 

Formula: np.exp( -theta**2/2)/np.sqrt(2*np.pi) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.92127054177e -31 

Token usage: 3255750 

Role: pysr 

Formula:  -tanh(0.101039540241464*sqrt(1/theta)  - (0.05163811*theta +

0.295673031987181*theta/theta**theta)/theta) 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 5.39862998812e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.367512991053) + (-0.358879467846)*theta**4/((0.946303096681) + theta**2)**2 + (-

0.820493073719)*theta**2/((25.6279513856) + theta**4) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.54136551914e -08 

Token usage: 228479 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.39894763/exp((theta^2)*0.5000064 + (1.3877332 + (theta^2)*( -0.6600442))*9.680921e -6) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.69554979458e -15 

Token usage: 68660 

Problem: I.6.2b 

Ground truth: exp( -((theta -theta1)/sigma)**2/2)/(sqrt(2*pi)*sigma) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (((theta  - theta1)/sigma)*exp( -0.5*((theta  - theta1)/sigma)**2))*0.69914126/((theta  -

theta1)/0.57061756) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.78474958542e -17 

Token usage: 257911 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.0 / np.sqrt(2.0 * np.pi) * np.exp( -0.5 * ((theta  - theta1) / np.where(sigma <= 0, np.finfo (float).eps, 

sigma)) ** 2) / np.where(sigma <= 0, np.finfo(float).eps, sigma) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.23007843233e -31 

Token usage: 2552386 

Role: drsr 

Formula: np.exp( -((theta -theta1)/sigma)**2/2)/(np.sqrt(2*np.pi)*sigma) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.79501777449e -31 

Token usage: 4636229 

Role: pysr Formula: Abs(0.04209158*sigma + Abs((0.15624918*sigma  -

0.44546032)*sin(theta1/(((0.9262945*theta)**log(theta))**log(theta))**0.83251613))) 

ACC: 0.846666666667 

NMSE: 0.0750868672819 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.262320949825) + (-0.114135091954)*(theta  - theta1)*(theta  - theta1) +

(0.0409899964853)*(theta  - theta1)*(sigma * (theta  - theta1)) + (0.133646123213)*cos(sigma) 

ACC: 0.9 

NMSE: 0.035681502449 

Token usage: 1036822 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (cos((theta  - theta1)*( -1.4598972)/sigma)*0.11056169 + cos(((theta  - theta1)/sigma)*((theta  -

theta1)/sigma)*( -2.206705)  - 1*( -0.29471588))*( -0.0004061885) + 0.28875753)*cos((theta  - theta1)*( -

0.6375771)/sigma)/sigma 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.97587746105e -09 

Token usage: 76334 

Problem: I.8.14 

Ground truth: sqrt((x2 -x1)**2+(y2 -y1)**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: sqrt((x1 + x2  - y1) + (x1 + x2  - y1)*((x1 + x2  - y1)  - 2.5882716) + 2.5615807)  - 0.9050158 

ACC: 0.224 

NMSE: 0.474643751657 

Token usage: 220284 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.29592448 * np.sqrt(( -3.9024619e -07 * x2 + 4.3792406 * x1 +  -3.3792403  - x1) ** 2 + ( -

3.3792409 * x2 + 4.3792404 * y1 + 3.4078505e -07  - y1) ** 2) + 4.4316231e -08 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.87470187776e -14 

Token usage: 2409189 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.508789662814)*x1 + (0.161547093229)*x2 + (0.0842874904063)*y1 + ( -0.0486600006276) 

ACC: 0.138666666667 NMSE: 0.36597103579 

Token usage: 2430387 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (exp(tanh(y1  - 3.89025)) + Abs(y1  - 1*1.0124472) + Abs((y1  - 1.601952)*0.83152944 + 

cos(y1)))**0.8837622  - 0.44668505 

ACC: 0.086 

NMSE: 1.1153928699 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -2.11998257062) + (1.02957659116)*(sqrt(x1^2 + x2^2)) + (2.08724420673)*(y1 / (x1 + x2)) + ( -

0.989308440334)*log((x1 + x2)*(y1 / (x1 + x2))) 

ACC: 0.3 

NMSE: 0.295810159139 

Token usage: 1014278 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (y1  - (x1 + x2))*(0.22330594*log(Abs(log(y1)) + 1)  - 0.20505172) + 0.48109448*Abs(y1  -

0.92410713) + Abs(0.528278392305401*(y1  - (x1 + x2)) + 0.6020189) 

ACC: 0.304 

NMSE: 0.304861244597 

Token usage: 297724 

Problem: I.9.18 

Ground  truth: G*m1*m2/((x2 -x1)**2+(y2 -y1)**2+(z2 -z1)**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: ((G * m1 * m2) + 0.39258987)/tanh((sqrt((x2  - x1)^2 + y1^2)))  - 1*0.30494136 

ACC: 0.232 

NMSE: 0.755552264664 

Token usage: 308686 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.443474 * G * m1 * m2 / np.maximum((1.9018032 * (x2  - x1)) ** 2 + (1.8314187e -05 * y1) ** 2 

+ 0.35596786, 1e -12) + (0.60676198 * m1 + 0.25685787 * m2 +  -1.6987076 * G + 1.2735414 * y1 + 

1.0418419) 

ACC: 0.833333333333 

NMSE: 0.0418580067334 

Token usage: 2862857 Role: drsr 

Formula: (1.01705453649)*m1 + (1.25689517291)*m2 + ( -1.40540552362)*G + (0.87785534435) 

ACC: 0.418 

NMSE: 0.263875372694 

Token usage: 2826814 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 1.0557821*m1/(G**G*sqrt(G**m2/sqrt(m2 + 0.32477924))*log(x1**m2*x2/(sqrt(y1)*tanh(x1)))) 

ACC: 0.980666666667 

NMSE: 0.013703214401 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.167835711029) + (5.69438917005) * (m1 * m2) + ( -3.66309434405) * (G * m1 * m2) 

ACC: 0.44 

NMSE: 0.287537227538 

Token usage: 1138455 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (m1 * m2)*((m1 * m2)*((m1 * m2)**9.0085  - ((sqrt((x2  - x1)^2 + y1^2))**4.334156  - ((m1 * m2) 

+ 2.8437583)))/(G * m1 * m2)  - 1.5008265)  - (((m1 * m2)*(G * m1 * m2))**6.365207  - 1*0.36297327) 

ACC: 0.388 

NMSE: 0.333559123759 

Token usage: 303318 

Problem: II.10.9 

Ground truth: sigma_den/epsilon*1/(1+chi) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (1/sigma_den)/((1/sigma_den) + 1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.18695096224e -31 

Token usage: 24894 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 / np.where(1.0 + 1 * sigma_den == 0, np.finfo(float).eps, 1.0 + 1 * sigma_den) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.09161992719e -31 Token usage: 2237227 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.0744791419163)*sigma_den + (0.499458680168) 

ACC: 0.694666666667 

NMSE: 0.0772641462235 

Token usage: 2096748 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 0.8020135*sin(sin(sin(sin(sigma_den**( -0.6242026724042)))))/sigma_den**0.28605792  -

0.003627948 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.33422925602e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -3.30536316635e -17) + (1)*(1/sigma_den)/(1 + (1/sigma_den)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.96888059962e -31 

Token usage: 161481 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (1/sigma_den)/((1/sigma_den) + 1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.18695096224e -31 

Token usage: 45751 

Problem: II.11.20 

Ground truth: n_rho*p_d**2*Ef/(3*kb*T) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (1.0 / n_rho)*0.10884799  - (-1)*0.22448534/n_rho 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.75646513168e -16 

Token usage: 22364 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.4329977e -07 * n_rho + 0.33333323 * n_rho **  -0.99999986 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 7.63904844984e -13 

Token usage: 1903417 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.30516085828)*n_rho + (0.0148291731474)*n_rho**2 + (0.897618072521) 

ACC: 0.0733333333333 

NMSE: 0.6410805432 

Token usage: 2836636 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 0.35261306/( -(-0.057839174)*n_rho + n_rho) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.30607875489e -17 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.333333333333)*(1.0 / n_rho)**(1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.75529561674e -24 

Token usage: 453244 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula:  -0.8783115*( -0.37951607)/n_rho 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.37055321797e -16 

Token usage: 47794 

Problem: II.11.27 

Ground truth: n*alpha/(1 -(n*alpha/3))*epsilon*Ef 

Role: search controller 

Formula: alpha*n*(0.33319047*alpha*n + 1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.00421945947128 

Token usage: 114389 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * (n * alpha) / (1.0  - n * alpha / 3.0) 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 4.99550892713e -32 

Token usage: 2290561 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (1) * (n * alpha) / (1.0  - (0.333333333333) * n * alpha) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.29369611976e -24 

Token usage: 4515516 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs((alpha*n*0.9311839/(0.44296482**alpha)**(n/1.6962692))**0.9687117  - 0.001360667) 

ACC: 0.953333333333 

NMSE: 7.8227369999e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.285829885786*alpha**2*n**2 + 1.00779973134*alpha*n  - 0.000247116665699 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.00787533714368 

Token usage: 1029505 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.13021027*(n*alpha)*((n*alpha)^2) + (n*alpha) +

((n*alpha)^2)*(0.035034955*(n*alpha)*(((n*alpha)^2) + 0.16328543*log(((n*alpha)^2))) + 0.33448017) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.35524180065e -11 

Token usage: 119218 

Problem: II.11.28 

Ground truth:  1+n*alpha/(1 -(n*alpha/3)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: exp(alpha*n) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.020416525601 

Token usage: 295777 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.0 + n * alpha / (1.0  - n * alpha / 3.0) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.04674519593e -31 

Token usage: 2513226 

Role: drsr 

Formula: 1 + n*alpha/(1  - (n*alpha/3)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.04674519593e -31 

Token usage: 4464641 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs((((0.6222025**alpha)**(0.5308141**alpha) + exp(1.2706684 + n*( -1.6547433))*0.07250163 

+ 1.6704609)**n)**alpha) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.23160849035e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1) + (1)*(n*alpha)/(1 + ( -0.333333333333)*(n*alpha)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.60744226791e -25 

Token usage: 240992 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 2.1197479**(n*alpha)*(n*alpha)/(n*alpha) + (n*alpha)*(((n*alpha)*0.674423 +

3.6452482)**(n*alpha)*0.039642718 + 0.20902234) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.26005958477e -11 

Token usage: 174926 

Problem: II.11.3 

Ground truth:  q*Ef/(m*(omega_0**2 -omega**2)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (q^2)/(1.0  - (q^2)) + 1.0 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.09100539571e -30 

Token usage: 29077 

Role: llmsr Formula: 1 / np.where(1  - 1 * q ** 2 == 0.0, np.finfo(float).eps, 1  - 1 * q ** 2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.70104373288e -30 

Token usage: 2264080 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (1.23508949576)*q + (0.72195947694) 

ACC: 0.996666666667 

NMSE: 0.0695712824651 

Token usage: 2137423 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (q + (((q*0.8367879  - 1*0.0019004461 +

0.95834386)**(q*2.1072059)*1.7762294)**(q*0.5894595))**(q*1.8297918))**q 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.4937710353e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1) + ( -0.951010049396)*q**2/(( -0.951010049396) + (0.951010049396)*q**2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.91928287373e -30 

Token usage: 219005 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (q^2) + (q + (q^2))**(q + 0.39922282)*(q^2)**4.8208995*( -0.23417933) +

exp(q*q*q*q)**exp((q^2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.91239159038e -13 

Token usage: 124658 

Problem: II.11.7 

Ground truth: N/A 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (x1 * cos(x2))*(x3 + 0.20311688*(x1 * cos(x2))) + (x1*sin(x2)) + (0.1303695*(x1 *

cos(x2))*(log(0.6628589*(x1*sin(x2))) + sin((x1 * cos(x2)))) + 0.023124570356925)*(sin(cos((x1*sin(x2)))) 

+ 0.6377462) 

ACC: 0.972 NMSE: 0.00013488358764 

Token usage: 343119 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: (1.1342027e -07 +  -0.42966935 * x1) * ( -1.1699957e -07 + 2.3273787 * x3) * (np.sin(0.9999951 * 

x2 + 4.7123946) +  -2.5647214e -06 * np.cos(1.7169189 * x2)) + (0.99999995 * x1 +  -1.4445861e -07 * x3) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.54089149241e -13 

Token usage: 3200505 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (-1.04233802528)*x1*x2 + (-0.332927166865)*x1*x3 + (-1.6033626133)*x2*x3 +

(3.06740790282)*x1 + (2.01466593007)*x2 + (3.21411281515)*x3 + ( -4.03598441094) 

ACC: 0.472666666667 

NMSE: 0.0334236011197 

Token usage: 5335548 

Role: pysr 

Formula: x3*(log(exp(x3)**cos(x3)/(x3*x3*sqrt(x3**exp(x3)))**2.81629165e -9) + 1.0) 

ACC: 0.0653333333333 

NMSE: 1.72130453649 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.0815874580305) + (0.919727387027)*x1 + (3.10308827352)*x3 + ( -0.186739819939)*(x1 * x3) 

+ ( -1.67857575559)*(x2 * x3) 

ACC: 0.444 

NMSE: 0.0921527685745 

Token usage: 754452 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: Abs(0.0060911006**((x3  - x2)*(x3  - x2))*((x1 * x3 / x2)*(x3  - x2)*((x1 * x3 / x2) + 2.3150325)  -

1.6446009) + (x1 * x3 / x2)  - 1.9149394)  - 1*0.37669808 

ACC: 0.088 

NMSE: 0.869158542856 

Token usage: 297982 

Problem: II.13.23 

Ground truth: rho_c_0/sqrt(1 -v**2/c**2) Role: search controller 

Formula: ((rho_c_0  - (1.0 / rho_c_0))/rho_c_0)**( -0.5) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.87291389861e -30 

Token usage: 31975 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 2.8338404 * rho_c_0 / np.sqrt( -8.0309515 + 8.0306352 * rho_c_0 ** 2 + 1e -12) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 7.27302362307e -09 

Token usage: 2117955 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.020968558921)*rho_c_0 + (1.13883924238) 

ACC: 0.985333333333 

NMSE: 0.423615648958 

Token usage: 2273816 

Role: pysr 

Formula: sqrt(Abs(exp((tanh((rho_c_0  - 0.0098555675)**1.4661278)  - 1.8749789)/(rho_c_0*(rho_c_0  -

0.40171865)))**( -1.038369) + 0.0012541421)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.78878649504e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (( -303.118056718) + (4.2841737941)*rho_c_0 + (-2.12724860853)*(1.0 / rho_c_0) +

(304.089004021)*rho_c_0*(1.0 / rho_c_0))/(1 + (4.28251757901)*rho_c_0 + (-4.4497485269)*(1.0 /

rho_c_0)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.19363352973e -08 

Token usage: 112273 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: ((rho_c_0  - (1.0 / rho_c_0))/rho_c_0)**( -0.5) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.87291389861e -30 

Token usage: 52751 Problem: II.13.34 

Ground truth: rho_c_0*v/sqrt(1 -v**2/c**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: ((rho_c_0  - (1/rho_c_0))/rho_c_0)**( -0.5) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.4042436323e -30 

Token usage: 173087 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -0.082735998 * rho_c_0 + 0.0062995923 * rho_c_0 ** 2 + 1.2712868 

ACC: 0.999333333333 

NMSE: 0.154405814558 

Token usage: 2545612 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.0195958370168)*rho_c_0 + (1.13241089528) 

ACC: 0.991333333333 

NMSE: 0.414325446635 

Token usage: 2599445 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 1.0024616*sqrt(tanh(sqrt(rho_c_0  - sqrt((rho_c_0*tanh(1.001247*rho_c_0**rho_c_0))**( -

0.8247827*rho_c_0))))**( -1.5475187)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.91057447111e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.992524110931 + 0.91144659732/rho_c_0**3 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.325833336528 

Token usage: 174234 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 7.231414e -7 + exp( -(1/rho_c_0)/((1/rho_c_0) + 0.1084044/(exp(rho_c_0)*exp( -((1/rho_c_0)  -

0.5450837)/( -2.57727162912072*(log(rho_c_0  - (1/rho_c_0))  - 0.005175262)*exp( -

1/(2.36993421820989*(1/rho_c_0)  - 0.42195264/(1/rho_c_0)))  - 2/((1/rho_c_0)  - 0.5450837)))  - 2.8671832)  -

2/(1/rho_c_0))) 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 2.69472541362e -08 

Token usage: 73079 

Problem: II.15.4 

Ground truth:  -mom*B*cos(theta) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: ( -(cos(mom))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.56848931077e -31 

Token usage: 112914 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -mom * (1.2362663 * (1.0 +  -0.16428351 * mom)) * np.cos(4.9348984 +  -0.55878896 * mom) +  -

0.87860011 

ACC: 0.988666666667 

NMSE: 1.31301404193e -06 

Token usage: 1668926 

Role: drsr 

Formula:  -(1.3681885469)*mom*np.cos(( -0.279826169434)*mom + ( -3.09001715086)) + ( -1.94946368881) 

ACC: 0.654666666667 

NMSE: 0.00772920402183 

Token usage: 3073954 

Role: pysr 

Formula:  -cos(mom) + tanh( -cos(exp(tanh(Abs(cos((0.71458316  - 1*( -

0.9718074))*Abs(mom*Abs(mom)))))))  - 0.32430276)*( -7.2541284e -10)*Abs(mom**2)*3.7359478 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.37151181009e -16 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (2.42796135307e -17) + ( -1)*cos(mom) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.56335404857e -31 

Token usage: 223455 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (cos(mom))*( -1.0) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.56848931077e -31 

Token usage: 15935 

Problem: II.15.5 

Ground truth:  -p_d*Ef*cos(theta) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: cos((p_d  - 3.141592653589793)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.27920407997e -31 

Token usage: 35969 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -(6.3193652e -06 * p_d +  -4.9706884) *  -0.20117993 * np.cos( -9.8602352e -08 + 1.0000002 * p_d) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.09481364285e -12 

Token usage: 1998913 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (-(-1.60105241781)*np.cos((0.312191846838)))*p_d + (-0.367701366604)*p_d**2 +

(0.776474409867)*p_d + ( -2.64982001795) 

ACC: 0.590666666667 

NMSE: 0.0115839851421 

Token usage: 3516932 

Role: pysr 

Formula: sin(p_d  - 1.8282704  - 1*( -0.2574741)) + 2.3462569e -8

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.16747702849e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 7.22446934981e -16  - cos(p_d) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.9080777771e -30 

Token usage: 140858 

Role: candidate decider Formula: (cos(p_d))*( -1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.78509786929e -31 

Token usage: 16110 

Problem: II.2.42 

Ground truth: kappa*(T2 -T1)*A/d 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (kappa  - 1.0)/T1 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.98881470634e -30 

Token usage: 129493 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: ( -0.44823751 * kappa + 0.46521929) * ( -2.5394371  - -0.59228079 * T1) + 0.013412413 

ACC: 0.238 

NMSE: 0.0662508915808 

Token usage: 2190994 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.61881910405)*kappa + ( -0.04193820411)*T1 + ( -0.548773052855) 

ACC: 0.164 

NMSE: 0.207094584563 

Token usage: 2266008 

Role: pysr 

Formula:  -(-3.3614231e -9)*(Abs(kappa/(sin(kappa)*( -2.2582293)  - 0.81800246)) + 0.72826165 +

0.82826084/((T1*T1*tanh(T1)))) + (kappa  - 1*1.0)/T1 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.55138272905e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (kappa  - 1)/T1 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.98881470634e -30 

Token usage: 633457 Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (kappa / T1)*(kappa  - 1.0)/kappa 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.01017624691e -30 

Token usage: 39659 

Problem: II.21.32 

Ground truth: q/(4*pi*epsilon*r*(1 -v/c)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula:  -1*0.0016667007 + 0.08124417  - 0.079577476/(1.0  - q) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.77871986412e -15 

Token usage: 25457 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -0.079578163 * q / (1.0  - 1.0000027 * q + 1e -12) +  -1.1938452e -07 * q 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.18388035122e -10 

Token usage: 2090306 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ((0.249782207644) * q) / (( -3.13885579415) + (3.13885579413) * q) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.90433831633e -22 

Token usage: 3014636 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 0.06542736 + 0.024694113/log(sqrt(q)  - 0.18625198 + 0.34281272/(q**2 + log(2))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.70920940144e -05 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -3.12101540374e -16) + (1.96839337451)*log(( -0.0396213317436) + q*(1/q))/(( -1) + (1/q)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.91033721454e -25 

Token usage: 113406 Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.07957747  - (-1)*0.079577476/(q  - 1*1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.24597079131e -15 

Token usage: 33640 

Problem: II.24.17 

Ground truth: sqrt(omega**2/c**2 -pi**2/d**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: sqrt(1.0  - 9.869604*(1/omega)**2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.48031761004e -15 

Token usage: 114389 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.45893149 +  -0.0013039628 * omega + 0.70181001 * np.sqrt(np.maximum((omega  - 0.91419714) 

** 2 / np.where((1.1152685 if 1.1152685 != 0 else 1e -12) * (1.0 + 1.0704315 * (omega  - 0.91419714)) == 0, 

1e -12, (1.1152685 if 1.1152685 != 0 else 1e -12) * (1.0 + 1.0704315 * (omega  - 0.91419714))) ** 2  - np.pi ** 

2 / np.where((1.156889 if 1.156889 != 0 else 1e -12) * (1.0 + 1.0853206 * (omega  - 0.91419714)) == 0, 1e -12, 

(1.156889 if 1.156889 != 0 else 1e -12) * (1.0 + 1.0853206 * (omega  - 0.91419714))) ** 2, 0.0)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000311066735768 

Token usage: 2693099 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.0106266466667)*omega + (0.826605708096) 

ACC: 0.986 

NMSE: 0.317179293548 

Token usage: 2833657 

Role:  pysr 

Formula: tanh(Abs(log(Abs(0.034888964 + log(log(0.450615879252969*omega)/(omega +

0.720247926622294  - 1.222391/omega**2))/omega)))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.15753820622e -05 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.972489756363965  - 2.8114765124/omega**2 ACC: 0.996 

NMSE: 0.232948410403 

Token usage: 178162 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.8768211*(1/omega)/(log(2*(1/omega))  - 7.9118305e -5) + ((1/omega)  - 7.9118305e -5)*(omega  -

1.8557299*(1/omega) + 0.20698188) + 0.0024875354 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.08265287994e -07 

Token usage: 6890288 

Problem: II.34.11 

Ground truth: g_*q*B/(2*m) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (g_/2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.83264288161e -31 

Token usage: 54983 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: g_ * 1 * 1 / (2.0 * 1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.9859961275e -31 

Token usage: 1582029 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.5) * g_ 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 8.9340957928e -26 

Token usage: 2915901 

Role: pysr 

Formula: g_*0.5 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.9859961275e -31 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author Formula: (g_/2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.83264288161e -31 

Token usage: 169092 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (g_/2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.83264288161e -31 

Token usage: 14498 

Problem: II.34.29b 

Ground truth:  g_*mom*B*Jz/(h/(2*pi)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: g_*(h*4.8975224e -8 + h)*0.7581056 + (g_*h)*5.5250797 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.14649705646e -17 

Token usage: 51492 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 6.2831854 * g_ * h 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.1964271312e -16 

Token usage: 1887493 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (7.65956480439)*g_ + (18.9350736092)*h + ( -22.9780134531) 

ACC: 0.452 

NMSE: 0.0968571823586 

Token usage: 2097736 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs(h*6.2831855*g_  - 3.82200000000005e -8) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.34359139629e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author Formula: ( -1.24857809314e -14) + (6.28318530718)*(g_**2*h  - g_*h**2)/(g_  - h) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.1615111575e -26 

Token usage: 219106 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: h*g_*0.626294 + (g_*h)*( -0.00028343804) + (g_*h)*1.5148949e -7 + (g_*h)*2.8119666e -5 + 

(g_*h)*5.6571465 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.60968692556e -17 

Token usage: 99856 

Problem: II.35.18 

Ground truth: n_0/(exp(mom*B/(kb*T))+exp( -mom*B/(kb*T))) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: n_0*( -0.0040454967  - 0.9025022/( -kb*(kb + (kb*( -0.95930755)*kb  - 0.51001626)*(kb  -

1.2810785)*( -0.12665503))  - 1.8035959)) 

ACC: 0.996 

NMSE: 7.71563627297e -07 

Token usage: 200410 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * n_0 / (2.0 * np.cosh(1 * kb) + 1e -12) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.97144638745e -25 

Token usage: 2585319 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (17.0505872585)*n_0/(np.exp((22.6851957992)/(kb+( -6.71051627716)))+np.exp( -

(22.6851957992)/(kb+( -6.71051627716)))) 

ACC: 0.935333333333 

NMSE: 0.00243839146932 

Token usage: 2606517 

Role: pysr 

Formula: sqrt(Abs((n_0**2.0401013/((kb**2.6913178 +

2.4662342)**1.5121171*sqrt(2.276619**kb)))**0.9828742)) 

ACC: 0.950666666667 NMSE: 0.000229699076238 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.07023961643) + (1.02852327862)*tanh((0.503967662359)*n_0 + ( -0.812762701547)*kb + ( -

0.995483857206)*(n_0 / (kb + n_0))) 

ACC: 0.9 

NMSE: 0.0057228141093 

Token usage: 695794 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: n_0*exp((n_0 * kb)/n_0)/(exp(kb)*exp((n_0 * kb)/n_0) + n_0/n_0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.40672264334e -31 

Token usage: 66053 

Problem: II.35.21 

Ground truth: n_rho*mom*tanh(mom*B/(kb*T)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: ((n_rho^2)/(0.20421058 + ((n_rho^2)*0.5014894 + 0.05563015)/n_rho) + 0.8442708)/((n_rho^2) + 

(n_rho^2) + 0.8336322) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.87280809877e -07 

Token usage: 197497 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: ( -2.7933362 * n_rho + 1.5588823) * np.tanh(0.0027747606 + 0.28028064 * n_rho / (1.0 + 

0.94045256 * n_rho ** 2)) + 0.94342679 

ACC: 0.997333333333 

NMSE: 0.000143027768706 

Token usage: 2545999 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (-7.89812184221)*n_rho*np.tanh(( -0.00308515518114)*n_rho + (0.0404127018655)) +

(1.06721153776) 

ACC: 0.736666666667 

NMSE: 0.124814391012 

Token usage: 2340754 Role: pysr 

Formula: tanh(n_rho**( -1.0)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.17063503446e -31 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.946814853492) + (0.440285253404)*n_rho + (0.000865726925344)*(n_rho^2) + (-

0.791988466139)*((n_rho^2)/(1 + (n_rho^2))) + ( -0.45979039203)*n_rho*((n_rho^2)/(1 + (n_rho^2))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.0014849136e -05 

Token usage: 525326 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula:  -0.009366577 + 1.1047633/(n_rho + (exp( -n_rho))/exp(n_rho*1.2697895)  - (exp( -

n_rho))/(n_rho/0.017294278  - ((exp( -n_rho)) + 0.01729428) + 0.00030370615/((n_rho^2)*(n_rho^2))) + 

0.3353261) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.35367776328e -06 

Token usage: 288641 

Problem: II.36.38 

Ground truth: mom*H/(kb*T)+(mom*alpha)/(epsilon*c**2*kb*T)*M 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (mom/(mom / (H * kb)) + 1.0)/mom 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.36099677297e -31 

Token usage: 38582 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -0.0048736757 * (mom * H / kb) +  -1.9448027 * mom + 0.21907026 * H + 2.4823608 * kb + 

0.46062155 * mom ** 2 + 0.078168316 * H ** 2 + 1.4419124 * kb ** 2 +  -0.20374351 * mom * H +  -

1.292378 * mom * kb + 2.6137311 

ACC: 0.232 

NMSE: 0.25126947868 

Token usage: 2708726 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -1.0182383937)*mom + (0.288575230881)*H + (2.08384879215)*kb + (1.88976429594) ACC: 0.150666666667 

NMSE: 0.463771113861 

Token usage: 2030078 

Role: pysr 

Formula: ((H*kb)**0.99999994  - 1*( -1.0))/mom 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.67565755866e -16 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -0.453076958089) + (1.23530363698)*H*kb + (1.35498413392)/(mom) 

ACC: 0.608 

NMSE: 0.060337368354 

Token usage: 847141 

Role:  candidate decider 

Formula: (mom/(mom / (H * kb)) + 1.0)/mom 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.36099677297e -31 

Token usage: 40801 

Problem: II.37.1 

Ground truth: mom*(1+chi)*B 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (mom + 1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.25301410706e -31 

Token usage: 77071 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * mom + 1 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.69902168709e -31 

Token usage: 1763252 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.999999999997)*mom + (1.00000000001) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.55399748286e -24 

Token usage: 1977546 

Role: pysr 

Formula: mom + (mom**0.9103938 + sin(mom/(( -0.7802015)*8.57926e -9*(mom  -

0.015092924)**0.76457417)))*8.57926e -9 + 0.084805004 + 0.9151949 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.16535744446e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1)*mom + (1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.25301410706e -31 

Token usage: 150515 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (mom + 1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.25301410706e -31 

Token usage: 14167 

Problem: II.38.14 

Ground truth: Y/(2*(1+sigma)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.5/(Y + 1.0) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.34821910862e -30 

Token usage: 26253 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -11.922254 * ((2.0663098 * Y + 1.4088918) / (2.0 * (1.0 + (1.5014892 + 3.798454 * (2.0663098 * 

Y + 1.4088918))))) + 1.5693336 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.10259231481e -09 

Token usage: 1922485 

Role: drsr Formula: ((3.68517212071) * Y) / ((18.9300425285) * (1 + ( -6.14193413825))) + (0.250653121785) 

ACC: 0.803333333333 

NMSE: 0.0772217762739 

Token usage: 2056725 

Role: pysr 

Formula: tanh(tanh(tanh(tanh(tanh(sin(0.349351199894916*(1/(Y  - 0.120679565*Abs((Y*(0.25221637*Y  -

0.0263304797879862))**0.127195225) + 0.30881733))**0.77290756)))  - 0.013649782))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.07585168461e -07 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -8.80318089194e -17) + (0.5)/(Y + (1)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.47214052456e -30 

Token usage: 98883 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (1/(Y + 1))*0.5 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.34821910862e -30 

Token usage: 23645 

Problem: II.38.3 

Ground truth: Y*A*x/d 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 1.0/(Y / A) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.44776839875e -29 

Token usage: 28856 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.0000003 * Y **  -0.99999987 * A ** 0.99999966 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.24607117665e -14 

Token usage: 1895239 Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.49264317898) + ( -0.242831912186)*Y + (1.04521926663)*A + ( -0.217083615655)*Y*A 

ACC: 0.216666666667 

NMSE: 0.179023557197 

Token usage: 2513132 

Role: pysr 

Formula: A*Abs(tanh(A/(0.10172727 + 0.43854696/((A*(Y*Y  - A + cos(8.805438  - A))))) + 163.1792))/Y 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.17125876008e -29 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: A/Y  - 9.38573228887e -17 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.46354582948e -29 

Token usage: 913912 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 1.0/(Y / A) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.44776839875e -29 

Token usage: 34774 

Problem: II.6.11 

Ground truth: 1/(4*pi*epsilon)*p_d*cos(theta)/r**2 

Role: search controller 

Formula: epsilon*(epsilon  - 0.05003169)*( -epsilon*(epsilon + (epsilon*(1/epsilon)  - 0.027247299)*( -

0.066837445))*( -(epsilon*( -0.0005778098)  - 0.023440387)  - 0.027832272)  - 0.041208483) + 0.078751706 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.67019367626e -10 

Token usage: 65869 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.13321451 * (1.0 / epsilon) + 0.15372763 +  -0.10816708 * (1.0 / epsilon) ** 2 +  -0.16291407 * 

epsilon + 0.02472239 * epsilon ** 2 

ACC: 0.968 

NMSE: 0.000270886977025 Token usage: 1790902 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -0.065188330282)*epsilon + (0.102547925819) 

ACC: 0.281333333333 

NMSE: 0.0168954757643 

Token usage: 2079140 

Role: pysr 

Formula: epsilon*(sin(tanh(tanh(epsilon*8.539856)))*cos(epsilon)*0.11531695 + 7.0793665e -10)/(epsilon  -

1*1.089012e -9) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.21593256589e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.430570923596) + (-3.71263975347)*epsilon/((16.0136938384) + (epsilon  - 2)**2) +

(8.18615910048)*(epsilon  - 2)/((47.3480695722) + epsilon**2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.49553193355e -08 

Token usage: 141187 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (epsilon  - 2)*( -0.006948465*epsilon  - (epsilon*(epsilon  - 2))*(0.00047556768*(epsilon*(epsilon  -

2))  - 0.0021964777*log(epsilon)  - 0.0032781037) + 0.006948465*(epsilon*(epsilon  - 2))  - 0.0584607713082) 

- 0.033115566 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.05928265932e -10 

Token usage: 203000 

Problem: II.6.15a 

Ground truth: p_d/(4*pi*epsilon)*3*z/r**5*sqrt(x**2+y**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: epsilon*r*(0.068664305 + 0.1726109/exp(p_d/((epsilon*0.6986411))))  - (-0.22769476)*(r * p_d) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.70721057981e -09 

Token usage: 270603 

Role: llmsr Formula: 3.8760532 * (p_d + 1e -12) ** 0.4644257 / (4.0 * np.pi * (np.abs(epsilon) + (abs(0.2706958) + 1e -

12)) **  -0.58781928 * (np.abs(r) + (abs( -2.5943337e -09) + 1e -12)) **  -1.004464) 

ACC: 0.914666666667 

NMSE: 0.00537335289251 

Token usage: 2622711 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.203297989505)*epsilon + (0.206745921074)*p_d + (0.445901948409)*r + ( -0.484032731062) 

ACC: 0.474 

NMSE: 0.0434027466223 

Token usage: 2453418 

Role: pysr 

Formula: p_d*r*(sin(tanh((epsilon**2.3513312*0.25633404)**0.6708354*0.26718318/p_d**1.5760373)) + 

0.23083165) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.88175362122e -06 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -0.000979741712237) + (0.174546465935)*epsilon*r + (0.171251822986)*p_d*r 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.00120689470785 

Token usage: 770368 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.16881745*r*(epsilon + (0.24756354  - 0.02800463*log(p_d/epsilon)**2)*( -epsilon +

p_d)*log(p_d/epsilon)) + 0.16881745*(r * p_d) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.3180888305e -09 

Token usage: 52464 

Problem: II.6.15b 

Ground truth: p_d/(4*pi*epsilon)*3*cos(theta)*sin(theta)/r**3 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (epsilon * ((1/epsilon)  - (epsilon  - 2))) + ((epsilon * ((1/epsilon)  - (epsilon  - 2))) + 0.16375236)*( -

(epsilon * ((1/epsilon)  - (epsilon  - 2)))*((epsilon * ((1/epsilon)  - (epsilon  - 2)))*((epsilon * ((1/epsilon)  -

(epsilon  - 2)))  - 1*0.5600756)*( -0.00020434124) + ((epsilon  - 2)  - 1.656179)*0.02198359)  - 1.01416)  -

1*0.069794156 + 0.117264226 ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.38110808193e -07 

Token usage: 204931 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 2.5519377 / epsilon +  -70.000235 / (epsilon + 2.3220606) + 57.846789 / (epsilon ** 2 + 4.4226143) 

+ 7.9614827 

ACC: 0.993333333333 

NMSE: 5.60651501598e -05 

Token usage: 1865531 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (( -5.05947273316)/epsilon + (8.69106884539)/(epsilon**2) + ( -4.37579758766)/(epsilon**3) + 

(0.813052294933)) 

ACC: 0.302666666667 

NMSE: 0.0352132017498 

Token usage: 3738102 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 1.3660393e -9 + epsilon*(cos(epsilon)*0.23873241  - 9.0095836e -10/epsilon)*sin(epsilon)/epsilon 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.04935946624e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (-0.11223983946) + (0.518357400068)*epsilon + (-0.187700387601)*epsilon*epsilon +

(0.131747553457)*(epsilon^2)*(epsilon^2) + (-0.22375956084)*epsilon*(epsilon^2) + (-

0.0181792496546)*epsilon*(epsilon^2)*(epsilon^2) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.2585302675e -06 

Token usage: 945654 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (epsilon  - 2)*(( -(epsilon^2)  - 0.85825807)*(epsilon  - 2)*( -0.25161344)  - (epsilon^2))*( -

0.036121774*(epsilon  - 2)*(1.9518888  - 0.6759537*(epsilon  - 2))  - 0.0016113544*(epsilon  - 2) +

0.038986344)  - 0.09031534 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.53414461327e -07 

Token usage: 207448 Problem: III.10.19 

Ground truth: mom*sqrt(Bx**2+By**2+Bz**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (sqrt(mom^2 + Bx^2 + 1)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.62180451309e -31 

Token usage: 28798 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -0.016284986 * mom * np.abs(Bx) + 0.33558711 * mom + 0.34642896 * np.abs(Bx) + 0.83008722 

+ 0.13492292 * mom ** 2 + 0.16591828 * np.abs(Bx) ** 2 + 0.026285501 * mom ** 2 * np.abs(Bx) +  -

0.072237053 * mom * np.abs(Bx) ** 2 + 0.014786006 * mom ** 2 * np.abs(Bx) ** 2 +  -0.012723183 * mom 

** 3 * np.abs(Bx) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000720571172939 

Token usage: 2023966 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.642935141318)*mom + (0.629481375058)*Bx + (0.545179420615) 

ACC: 0.976666666667 

NMSE: 0.0103037885986 

Token usage: 2288281 

Role: pysr 

Formula: sqrt(mom**2.0 + Bx**2 + Abs(Bx/Abs(Bx))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.47439400817e -31 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.0184825002219*Bx*mom**2  - 0.276968576887202*Bx*mom + 1.19124815776*Bx +

1.19124815776*mom  - 0.222834171547*log(Bx*mom*(Bx + mom))  - 0.228874700005 

ACC: 0.996 

NMSE: 0.00934231035038 

Token usage: 156504 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: sqrt(mom*(mom  - Bx) + Bx*(mom + Bx) + 1.0) 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 1.68035341248e -31 

Token usage: 41356 

Problem: III.12.43 

Ground truth: n*(h/(2*pi)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: n*0.11889101 + 0.040263932/(1.0 / n) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.7282789198e -16 

Token usage: 52196 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * n / (2.0 * np.pi) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.21448528707e -31 

Token usage: 1563015 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.159154943092) * n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.20742521141e -24 

Token usage: 2862514 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 

0.159154940581905*Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(Abs(n))))))))))))))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.85804052988e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.159154943092*n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.42641393954e -24 

Token usage: 137668 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: n*0.028447693 + n*0.13070725 ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.64078690479e -18 

Token usage: 27544 

Problem: III.13.18 

Ground truth: 2*E_n*d**2*k/(h/(2*pi)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: E_n*0.00012561145 + E_n + E_n + E_n*10.566245  - 1.4653083e -6

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.27357684609e -16 

Token usage: 114389 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 4 * np.pi  * 1 ** 2 * 1 / 1 * E_n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.52626860793e -31 

Token usage: 1758706 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (12.5663706144)*E_n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.12051855163e -28 

Token usage: 3243617 

Role: pysr 

Formula:  -E_n + E_n*1.0254036 + E_n*12.540967 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.32599790318e -18 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (2.05309031715e -14) + (6.28318530718)*(E_n + (E_n^2)) + (6.28318530718)*(E_n  - (E_n^2)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.90989258647e -26 

Token usage: 541144 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (E_n  - 9.2482395 + (E_n^2)/E_n)*6.2831855 + 58.108402 ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.37325657347e -15 

Token usage: 27148 

Problem: III.14.14 

Ground truth: I_0*(exp(q*Volt/(kb*T)) -1) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: exp((1.0 / I_0))  - 1.0 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.98444244835e -31 

Token usage: 47103 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: I_0 * np.expm1( -8.4808132 * I_0 + 6.466813) + 2.5616541 

ACC: 0.804666666667 

NMSE: 0.0292848226061 

Token usage: 2088485 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -2.88427266938)*I_0 + (5.3516156076) 

ACC: 0.123333333333 

NMSE: 0.550040417499 

Token usage: 2128012 

Role: pysr 

Formula: exp(I_0/(I_0*I_0))  - 1.7585578  - 1*( -0.7585578) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.68421985037e -31 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (I_0*(I_0 + 0.494524519177) + 0.112605801901)/(I_0*(I_0**2  - 0.064426717090446)) 

ACC: 0.992 

NMSE: 0.00801436092806 

Token usage: 161729 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: exp((1.0 / I_0))  - 1.2649703  - 1*( -0.2649703) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.04052057751e -31 

Token usage: 51020 

Problem: III.15.12 

Ground truth: 2*U*(1 -cos(k*d)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 2.0  - ((cos(U)) + (cos(U))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.70252248654e -31 

Token usage: 26156 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: ( -3.8274329e -08 * U + 2.0000001) * (1.0  - np.cos( -1.0 * U + 3.3690978e -07)) +  -1.1396977e -07 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.55002210288e -13 

Token usage: 2096072 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (( -0.333237745717) * U * (1  - np.cos((0.567434073996)))) + (2.62791925286) 

ACC: 0.088 

NMSE: 0.999327784374 

Token usage: 2945235 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (1.9459958*Abs(Abs(U)/Abs(Abs(U))) + 0.054004263) + cos(Abs(U))*( -1.9999999) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.18950072854e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 2  - 2*cos(U) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.70252248654e -31 

Token usage: 222705 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 2.0  - ((cos(U)) + (cos(U))) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.70252248654e -31 

Token usage: 27457 

Problem: III.15.27 

Ground truth: 2*pi*alpha/(n*d) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (alpha / n)*1.5708168 + (alpha / n)*4.7123685 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.44712620233e -18 

Token usage: 89014 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * 2 * np.pi * alpha / n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 9.66282813769e -32 

Token usage: 1755505 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (6.28318530718) * alpha / n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.5861231436e -30 

Token usage: 3881386 

Role: pysr 

Formula: alpha*6.2831855/n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.2429862356e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 6.28318530718*alpha/n 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.47854212676e -26 

Token usage: 178064 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (alpha/n) + (alpha/n)*4.9167905 + ((alpha/n)*( -1.6379939) + (alpha/n))*( -0.57429206) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.93584124722e -17 

Token usage: 6890288 

Problem: III.17.37 

Ground truth: beta*(1+alpha*cos(theta)) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: beta + (alpha*beta)*cos(theta) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.40499482024e -31 

Token usage: 44327 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1 * beta * (1.0 + alpha * np.cos(theta)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.19891596399e -31 

Token usage: 1711960 

Role: drsr 

Formula: beta * (1 + alpha * np.cos(theta)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.19891596399e -31 

Token usage: 4838578 

Role: pysr 

Formula: beta*alpha*( -1.6430067e -9*beta**log(beta)*theta*log((theta*(theta  -

0.92251469))**log(log(beta))) + cos(theta)) + beta 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 6.50919159571e -15 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (2.07665555712) + (0.448672002161)*(alpha * cos(theta)) + (0.00759824602557)*(alpha *

beta)*(alpha * beta) + (0.548880049974)*(alpha * beta)*cos(theta) + (0.0818523560697)*(alpha *

cos(theta))*(alpha * beta) 

ACC: 0.44 

NMSE: 0.0205139599915 

Token usage: 667064 Role: candidate decider 

Formula: beta + alpha*(beta*cos(theta)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.33337107633e -31 

Token usage: 6890288 

Problem: III.19.51 

Ground truth:  -m*q**4/(2*(4*pi*epsilon)**2*(h/(2*pi))**2)*(1/n**2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: N/A 

ACC:  -1

NMSE: N/A 

Token usage: 95012 

Role: llmsr 

Formula:  -0.0061082866 * m **  -2.0003658 / np.where(0.22105621 == 0.0, 1.0, 0.22105621) ** 2 +  -

5.267681e -06 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.63339260601e -09 

Token usage: 1911648 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (0.019147858082)*m + ( -0.0832552187081) 

ACC: 0.0773333333333 

NMSE: 0.306978069973 

Token usage: 2164536 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (0.2593472/Abs(m**2))/( -2.0747776) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.78616232518e -30 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula:  -0.125/m**2 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.46966647675e -30 Token usage: 712870 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (1.0 / (m^2))*( -0.125) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.46966647675e -30 

Token usage: 6890288 

Problem: III.4.32 

Ground truth: 1/(exp((h/(2*pi))*omega/(kb*T)) -1) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 6.2831855*h  - 0.4999999 + 0.0132425021783717/h 

ACC: 0.996 

NMSE: 1.15835499236e -08 

Token usage: 114389 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 1.0 / (np.exp(( -1.5276451e -08 * h + 0.43410997) / (2.7275926 * h + 4.1508781e -07 + 1e -12))  - 1.0 

+ 1e -12) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.51900567569e -14 

Token usage: 2100791 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (6.27582293318)*h + ( -0.469836893771) 

ACC: 0.983333333333 

NMSE: 2.72939763842e -06 

Token usage: 2144855 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs( -(h  - (-5.2831855)*h  - 0.500003) + tanh(tanh(tanh(tanh(sin(tanh(tanh(tanh( -

0.013270048/h))))))))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.12149738845e -12 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (6.28320047298)*(h**2 + ( -0.0752811917256)*h + (0.0017920913526))/(h + (0.00431349656036)) 

ACC: 1 NMSE: 1.46988359128e -09 

Token usage: 126657 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: ((h^2)/h)*6.2831855  - 1*0.5000009 + (-1*( -0.013263675) + 4.4928882e -8/(h^3))/((h^2)/h)  -

5.76498e -6/(h^3) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.69081020626e -12 

Token usage: 6890288 

Problem: III.4.33 

Ground  truth: (h/(2*pi))*omega/(exp((h/(2*pi))*omega/(kb*T)) -1) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: h  - 0.0604476900785013 

ACC: 0.996 

NMSE: 0.000132552870313 

Token usage: 114389 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.0014019339 * h / (np.exp(1.4979437 * h)  - 1) +  0.99994537 * h +  -0.078866942 + 0.0021598181 

/ (np.exp(1.10063 * h)  - 1) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.90740816598e -09 

Token usage: 3286611 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ((1.05708704765)*h)/(np.exp(((1.08843303815)*h+(0.0310004792342))/((1.50909393246)*h+( -

0.0430262911969))) -1) 

ACC: 0.999333333333 

NMSE: 8.84247970418e -09 

Token usage: 2604446 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs(Abs(Abs(h)  - 0.060125876) + (h  - 0.02576486)*(Abs(h  - 0.018276904)  - 0.08591131)*( -

0.0194713)/(Abs(h  - 0.019902864)*h)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.54958034647e -11 

Token usage: 0 Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.00001017873)*(h + ( -0.0388956804704))**2/(h + (0.0077542758959)) + (0.00590792811082) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.44756177698e -10 

Token usage: 590609 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (-h + (h) + ((h)  - (h + 1.3035443e -6))*((h)**( -1.8216) + (h) + 0.0021109716) +

0.0021108019)/h**1.0006716 + (h)  - 0.07957566 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.06222702592e -13 

Token usage: 6890288 

Problem: III.8.54 

Ground truth: sin(E_n*t/(h/(2*pi)))**2 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (E_n^2)*(E_n^2)*0.0069326395 + (0.28619504*(E_n*(E_n^2)*(E_n^2) + (exp( -E_n)))*exp( -

0.28619504*E_n*(E_n^2)**2  - 0.28619504*(exp( -E_n))))*3.091553  -

27.967654484871*((E_n^2)*3.8721023  - 2.9844203)*exp( -

3.8721023*(E_n^2))*exp(27.967654484871*((E_n^2)*3.8721023  - 2.9844203)*exp( -3.8721023*(E_n^2))) 

ACC: 0.58 

NMSE: 0.20869128382 

Token usage: 114389 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.35639401 + 0.48716266 * np.sin(2.0 * np.pi * 0.86062854 * E_n / np.where(1.2363879 == 0, 1e -

12, 1.2363879) + 1.7376258) ** 2 +  -0.090127909 * E_n 

ACC: 0.064 

NMSE: 0.786891508824 

Token usage: 2445134 

Role: drsr 

Formula: np.sin((0.105791510407) * E_n + ( -0.908601984159))**2 

ACC: 0.0566666666667 

NMSE: 0.977604662102 

Token usage: 2858862 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs(sin( -6.283186/E_n))**2.000011 ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.38503194071e -11 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.606830999158) + (E_n^2)*cos(E_n) 

ACC: 0.268 

NMSE: 15.8430742072 

Token usage: 781103 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: sin( -1.5707963  - 12.566371/((E_n^2)/( -E_n + (E_n^2))) + (-6.041159 + (exp( -

E_n))/(E_n^2))*(E_n  - (E_n^2)/E_n)/(E_n^2))*0.5 + 0.5 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.69829727814e -14 

Token usage: 6890288 

Problem: III.9.52 

Ground truth: (p_d*Ef*t/(h/(2*pi)))*sin((omega -omega_0)*t/2)**2/((omega -omega_0)*t/2)**2 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (1.2337629  - sin(( -Ef + t + 5.142917)/( -3.2749314)))*1.4057425*(1.0008206  - sin(( -Ef + t + 

3.144172)/( -2.0014355)))/p_d 

ACC: 0.972 

NMSE: 3.17520513824e -05 

Token usage: 114389 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 5.1377461 * p_d **  -0.78618795 * Ef **  -0.1725622 * t ** 0.28574052 * (np.sin(0.26758702 * t / 

2.0) ** 2 / (0.26758702 * t / 2.0 +  -0.02240812) ** 2) 

ACC: 0.13 

NMSE: 0.687543004695 

Token usage: 3295109 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ( -32.5508339784)*p_d + ( -0.357124004602)*Ef + ( -0.330409877734)*t + (30.2955046113) 

ACC: 0.140666666667 

NMSE: 0.846541844867 

Token usage: 2761334 Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs(Abs(Abs(t  - Abs(13.468766 + 6.12928*sin(log(1.482173*Ef*(Ef/t  - 0.74737805) +

2.9269912))/p_d))  - 5.203321)  - 3.7916138) 

ACC: 0.374 

NMSE: 0.0854526648114 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (32.6101731828) + (-16.3252446917)*p_d*exp( -(-0.106583558307)*t) + (-

5.70458859044)*Ef*exp( -(0.306999401491)*t) 

ACC: 0.236 

NMSE: 0.72058000746 

Token usage: 765444 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula:  -1*0.0012978212 + ( -(-0.0002298771)*((Ef  - t)^2)/exp(p_d) + (6.6732526  - 0.17271689*((Ef  -

t)^2))*(exp(( -(-0.006307087)*((Ef  - t)^2)*((Ef  - t)^2) + ((Ef  - t)^2))*( -0.053582754))  - 0.05865095))/p_d 

ACC: 0.94 

NMSE: 7.79571330274e -05 

Token usage: 6890288 

Dataset group: complex_formula 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Problem: CRK0 

Ground truth:  -0.1899*A^2 + (0.459688*A^2)/(0.7498*A^4 + 1) 

Role: search controller 

Formula:  -0.623587514510912*A**2 + 0.941978882215093*A  - 0.246802528140829 

ACC: 0.997428571429 

NMSE: 0.00030446440905 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.79183693 + 3.8209172e -08 * t  - (1.1126865 + (1.095212  - 1.1126865) * (1  - np.exp( -t / 

np.clip(1.0183726, 1e -12, None))) * A ** np.clip (0.99736705, 0.0, None))  - 1.1025406 * (A  - 0.7614884) + 

0.65655283 * A ** np.clip(0.86891292, 0.0, None) 

ACC: 0.984 

NMSE: 3.96969083688433E -07 

Role: drsr Formula:  -(-2.50011634821)*A  - (2.05806017639)*A**2  - (-0.437215087889)*A**3 + ( -2.35047465035e -

05)*np.exp( -(0.3521279243)*t) + ( -0.80641424975) 

ACC: 0.999 

NMSE: 9.20524136990111E -10 

Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs(A*exp( -t*A/(2.8321362/A) + exp(A*A*( -sin(t)  - 4.6407003))  - 2.6322055)  - 1*1.4102863e -5) 

ACC: 0.222 

NMSE: 0.000206037101513 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -0.813479460233) + (2.51956385973)*A + ( -2.07603042632)*A**2 + (0.442778275143)*A**3 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.48453768138e -09 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: ((A  - 1.173)  - ((A  - 1.173)^2)*((A  - 1.173) + 0.023408754) + ((A  - 1.173)^2)  - (-((A  - 1.173)^2) + 

exp(((A  - 1.173)^2))))*( -0.52292943)  - 1*0.52280223 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.46566576007e -10 

Problem: I.37.4_0_1 

Ground truth: 2*I2*cos(delta)^2 + I2 + Int + 2*sqrt(I2*(I2*cos(delta)^2 + I2 + Int))*cos(delta) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: I2 + Int + (cos(delta))*(I2*((cos(delta))*((cos(delta)) + 3.3952599) + 3.542877) + Int  -

(Int*(0.43900788 + (cos(delta))*( -0.07017853))  - (sqrt(Int*I2))))*0.5667753 

ACC: 0.987509433962 

NMSE: 0.000274543224467 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: (np.sqrt( np.clip(I2, 0.0, None)) * np.cos(delta) + np.sqrt(np.clip(0.99999999 * (np.clip(Int, 0.0, 

None)  - np.clip(I2, 0.0, None) * (1.0  - np.cos(delta) ** 2)) + 2 * np.clip(I2, 0.0, None), 0.0, None))) ** 2 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 2.37337863874433E -14 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (Int + (1.39168679436)*I2*np.cos(delta)  - (-1.15647141611)*I2) / ((1.05612422142) + (-

0.664309580321)*np.cos(delta) + 1e -8) 

ACC: 0.9054375 

NMSE: 0.0037220484666894 Role: pysr 

Formula: Abs((Int + 0.623474458136165*exp(sqrt(I2) + cos(delta))  -

0.022444502)*exp(cos(delta))**0.6476931  - 0.63017774) 

ACC: 0.83135 

NMSE: 0.00548658357172 

Role: equation author 

Formula: ( -0.037035976986) + (1.01068270465)*(Int + I2) + (1.24595133436)*(2*sqrt(Int*I2))*(cos(delta)) 

+ (0.535839646511)*(2*sqrt(Int*I2))*(cos(delta))*(cos(delta)) 

ACC: 0.878 

NMSE: 0.0120336922502 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (I2*(cos(delta))*(0.27563432  - 0.17236868*(cos(delta))**2) + (Int +

I2))*sqrt((I2/(0.0559349498906751*Int + 0.0337412091234378*I2) + 1.5054215)**(cos(delta))) +

0.003649249 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.84704558979e -06 

Problem: III.4.33_3_0 

Ground truth: (h*omega)/(2*pi*kb*log(1 + (h*omega)/(2*pi*E_n))) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (7.7758526494585*E_n**2 + 1.27258722575714*E_n*h*omega +

0.0379624692664019*h**2*omega**2)/(kb*(7.7758526494585*E_n + 0.7545174*h*omega)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.000196735361542 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: h / (2.0 * np.pi) * omega / kb / np.maximum(np.log1p(h / (2.0 * np.pi) * omega /

(np.maximum(E_n  - (0.5 +  -0.5) * (h / (2.0 * np.pi)) * (omega * (1.0 + 0.58094473)), 1e -12) + 1e -12) + 1e -12), 

1e -12) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 5.47404150472047E -15 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ((4.05397374512)*E_n + (0.261618170739)*h*omega + (0.0156415308531)*E_n*h*omega + 

(0.196186895535)) / (kb*((4.08044670215) + (0.00700417604028)*h*omega + ( -0.000711519323664)*E_n + 

(0.000246064465768)*h*omega*E_n)) 

ACC: 0.997125 

NMSE: 3.88030566420042E -06 Role: pysr 

Formula: (E_n + log(log(log(1.9311807**h + sin(sqrt(1.9311807**(h + 0.44728914)  - 0.302587354901568)) 

+ 0.44728914)**omega + 4.213333)  - 0.5485824))/kb 

ACC: 0.9879 

NMSE: 2.76932477566e -05 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.00063503216*E_n + 0.0715201182899*h*omega)/kb 

ACC: 0.99 

NMSE: 2.91191450899e -05 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (h * omega / kb)*((E_n / (h * omega)) + ( -0.0013812685  - 4.828934e -6/(E_n / (h * omega)))/((E_n 

/ (h * omega)) + 0.107747674)  - 1*( -0.07957804)  - 0.0007284028/((E_n / (h * omega)) + 0.030991424)  -

4.7824376e -8/(0.057898674  - 0.0013812516/(E_n / (h * omega)))) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 3.21664624125e -14 

Problem: bactgrow 

Ground truth: mu_max*b*(s/(Ks+s))*(tanh(k*(temp -x0))/(1 + c*(temp -x_decay)^4))*exp( -abs(pH -

pH_opt))*sin(((pH -pH_min)*pi/(pH_max -pH_min))^2) 

Role: search controller 

Formula: (b + (b * s)*0.10697548)*log(log(1 + exp( -Abs((5.603636 + temp*( -0.16584201))*(17.702116 + 

temp*( -0.48881134))))) + 1)*log(log(1 + exp( -Abs(1.53724996354776*pH  - 10.7648392909123))) + 1) 

ACC: 0.138142857143 

NMSE: 0.00432752351084 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: (0.046499216 + 0.33539561 * s / (np.abs(0.84932334) + 1e -12 + s) * (1  - s / (np.abs( -1.0798344) + 

1e -12))) * (1 / (1 + np.exp( -(np.abs(1.2447839) + 1e -12) * (temp  - 1.0056442)))  - 1 / (1 + np.exp( -

(np.abs(1.2447839) + 1e -12) * (0.73312607  - 1.0056442))) / (1  - 1 / (1 + np.exp( -(np.abs(1.2447839) + 1e -12) 

* (0.73312607  - 1.0056442)))  - 1 / (1 + np.exp( -(np.abs(1.2447839) + 1e -12) * (1.2658531  - 1.0056442))))) * 

np.exp( -(pH  - -0.36901177) ** 2 / 2) * (((np.abs( -0.047172079) + 1e -12) / (np.abs( -0.047172079) + 1e -12 + b)) 

** (np.abs(1.8654913) + 1e -12) * (1  - (np.abs(1.2738282) / (np.abs(1.2738282) + b)) ** (np.abs(0.36464351) 

+ 1e -12))) 

ACC: 0.00133333333333333 

NMSE: 1.077955185286 

Role: drsr Formula: (0.0165524935353) * b * (s / ((1.20219110741) + s)) * np.exp( -(-0.00125549919395) * (temp  - (-

10.7585972103))**2) * np.exp( -(0.774915960402) * (pH  - (7.03320309842))**2)  - (-5.08179863601e -05) * b 

- (0.000375217919815) * b**2 

ACC: 0.0101333333333333 

NMSE: 0.312387558034066 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (sqrt(temp)  - 3.9351313)*Abs(0.03407653*Abs((sin(pH + 0.84856886) + 0.5643238)*( -sqrt(temp) 

+ sin(b) + 1.0768099))  - 0.0318680754124849) 

ACC: 0.018 

NMSE: 0.405795378728 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (0.00906311441171) * b * exp((0.0625724138888) * temp) * exp((0.0284401623164) * (temp * (1 

- abs(pH  - 7)))) 

ACC: 0.048 

NMSE: 0.27627138061 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (-0.06592953 + 1.2631224*exp( -Abs(0.214705877299155*temp  - 8.000169)))*(b*exp( -

1.1210316*Abs(pH  - 7.0004935))  - 0.033562835)*exp( -1.5256155*exp( -Abs(s)))*exp( -

Abs(0.233876425329309*temp  - 7.656467)) 

ACC: 0.358 

NMSE: 0.00167709666715 

Problem: oscillator1 

Ground truth: 0.8*sin(x)  - 0.5*v^3  - 0.2*x^3  - 0.5*x*v  - x*cos(x) 

Role: search controller 

Formula:  -0.499016539205744*v*(v**2 + x) + 0.151556785639324*x**3  - 0.19849712*x 

ACC: 0.998210526316 

NMSE: 2.53857070382e -06 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: (0.36725823 * x  - 0.11316885 * x ** 3 + (0.00019286678 * v  - 0.94674756 * v ** 3) +  -

0.94265558 * x * v +  -1.055715e -05 * (1.0 + 0.1 * np.abs(x) + 0.05 * np.abs(v)) * np.cos(x + 0.90867438) + 

0.37186031 * (1.0 + 0.1 * x ** 2) * np.cos(2.0 * x + 1.5707295)) / 1.8844166 

ACC: 0.9992 

NMSE: 1.3302684870906E -07 

Role: drsr Formula:  -(-0.894452906022)*x  - (-3.9056718967e -08)*v  - (0.191816100413)*x**3  -

(0.500001417226)*v**3  - (0.499999881871)*x*v + (1.65519555271e -08) + (0.780663043147)*np.sin(( -

1.40195509155)*x) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 1.67374488970997E -12 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (-v + cos(x*1.1915406)*( -1.3737239))*(x*tanh(tanh(v)  - 1*( -0.42587212)) + v*v*(v  -

0.009031496))*0.34999835 

ACC: 0.9744 

NMSE: 0.000194098552143 

Role: equation author 

Formula:  -0.49711038403*v**3  - 0.500211023945*v*x + 0.153061890717*x**3  - 0.198893072711*x 

ACC: 0.998 

NMSE: 1.94924320828e -06 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula:  -0.048358284*x + (x  - (x^3))*( -v*(v^2)*(v*((x*v)  - 1*( -0.8564168))  - 0.13683422)  - 0.14960459) 

+ (v*(v^2) + (x*v))*( -0.50056773) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.35926373117e -07 

Problem: oscillator2 

Ground truth: 0.3*sin(t)  - 0.5*v^3  - 1.0*x*v  - 5.0*x*exp(0.5*x) 

Role: search controller 

Formula:  -0.99975324*v*(x  - cos(v))  - v - 5.000083*x + 0.30000252995933*sin(t)  - 2.5000415*tan(x**2) 

ACC: 0.999052631579 

NMSE: 9.80782121794e -06 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 0.94692288 * ( -0.31684273 * np.sin(0.99998977 * t + 9.4252672)  - (5.2788896 * x + 2.6424689 * 

x ** 2 + 0.73923909 * x ** 3)  - (-0.0004869684 * v + 0.53634821 * v ** 3)  - 1.0556832 * x * v) 

ACC: 0.9992 

NMSE: 4.41383910893228E -08 

Role: drsr 

Formula: (-5.00005584482)*x + (-0.622171533691)*x**3 + (9.16119541255e -08)*v + (-

0.500052307074)*v**3 + ( -0.99997079799)*x*v + ( -2.50284285053)*x**2 + (3.22054641656e -05)*v**2 + 

(-0.300000225672)*np.sin(( -1.00000017885)*t) + (6.39506807991e -06) ACC: 1 

NMSE: 4.22206564715512E -10 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (sin(x) + 0.55058265*cos(2.23104495412801*t  - 0.426400591269029))*cos(log(t  - sin(t)  -

cos(0.986122425667481*t  - 1.48349793979224*x))) 

ACC: 0.5806 

NMSE: 0.00875670136085 

Role: equation author 

Formula:  -0.0318665366944*v  - 2.3478917222*x**2  - 5.03457658153*x +

0.298050820308*sin(0.999980436038*t) 

ACC: 0.858 

NMSE: 0.00150428390217 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: (0.0005796547  - (v*v*( -(x^3)/(x + 0.25876948) + (x + 0.021030162)*0.36042473)  -

(x*0.054585215  - (x^3))))*( -135.58333) 

ACC: 0.328 

NMSE: 0.132180763971 

Problem: stressstrain 

Ground truth: (A + B*strain^n)*(1  - ((temp -Tr)/(Tm -Tr))^m) 

Role: search controller 

Formula:  -0.0582393 + exp( -temp**2*exp( -(strain * (1  - temp))**2)*exp((strain^2)))*exp( -(0.5816915  -

exp( -exp(2*strain*(strain * (1  - temp))  - 2*temp)) + 1.5569849*exp( -67.5881248690533*strain))**2) 

ACC: 0.920529801325 

NMSE: 0.0153913678069 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: np.clip(np.where(np.abs(strain) <= ( -1.9159115 +  -0.88395036 * (temp  - 3.5133818)) / (32.89433 + 

-0.91930236 * (temp  - 3.5133818)), (32.89433 +  -0.91930236 * (temp  - 3.5133818)) * strain, np.sign(strain) * 

(-1.9159115 +  -0.88395036 * (temp  - 3.5133818) + ( -0.82158661 +  -0.21471593 * (temp  - 3.5133818)) * 

(np.abs(strain)  - (-1.9159115 +  -0.88395036 * (temp  - 3.5133818)) / (32.89433 +  -0.91930236 * (temp  -

3.5133818))))),  -0.85056205, 0.85056205) 

ACC: 0.813975011568718 

NMSE: 0.0210373011174167 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ((35.9883662212) * strain * (1 + ( -0.0115129087436) * temp + (0.00218407613697) * temp**2) + 

(-35.643631154) * np.maximum(strain  - ((0.0231713232655) + (0.0016443854171) * temp + (-0.018145977602) * temp**2), 0.0) + ( -0.360595550616) * np.maximum(strain  - ((0.0231713232655) + 

(0.0016443854171) * temp + (-0.018145977602) * temp**2), 0.0)**2 + (0.000539209353519) +

(0.0151926215581) * temp) 

ACC: 0.755668671911152 

NMSE: 0.0179449135777797 

Role: pysr 

Formula: 

sin(exp(tanh(sin(strain))))*sin(exp(re(0.0019494138**tanh(strain))))*cos(temp*Abs(sin(exp(sin(tanh(strain))) 

))/0.73116386) 

ACC: 0.70319001387 

NMSE: 0.0906428680881 

Role: equation author 

Formula: (1.08003035643) + (-0.952860297193)*strain*temp + (0.128259304369)*log(strain +

(0.0007392910429)) + ( -0.315858818736)*temp**2 

ACC: 0.492 

NMSE: 0.0903257425823 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: 0.86867570081697*exp( -2*Abs(exp( -153.95023*Abs(strain))/temp**0.34385886 +

temp**2.7684977*((strain**2*((strain^2)  - 1*( -0.5469036))**2*exp( -Abs((strain * (1  - temp))  -

1*0.094919465)))**((strain^2)  - 1*( -0.44512773))  - 1*( -0.50284195)))) 

ACC: 0.838 

NMSE: 0.00907740710997 

Dataset group: battery 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Problem: battery_cycle_life_log_zscore 

Ground truth: N/A 

Role: search controller 

Formula: 0.18800634*delta_q_100_10_min + 0.08823834*Abs(delta_q_100_10_min  - 0.3875072) +

2.7426913 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.169492688492 

Role: llmsr 

Formula: 2.7939691  - (0.009369131 * delta_q_100_10_min + 0.11576148 * delta_q_100_10_var + ( -

0.0014997437 * capacity_fade_slope_2_100 + 0.048894435 * capacity_fade_intercept_2_100) + -0.081122356 * discharge_capacity_cycle_2 + 0.03383006 * temp_integral_2_100 + 0.018372048 *

min_ir_2_100 + 0.017604721 * ir_diff_100_2 +  -0.031506652 * avg_charge_time_first_5) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.0346581964098319 

Role: drsr 

Formula: ((0.00150675242993) * capacity_fade_slope_2_100 + (-0.0489142351767) *

capacity_fade_intercept_2_100 + (0.0811423116135) * discharge_capacity_cycle_2 + (0.0315088619397) * 

avg_charge_time_first_5 + ( -0.0338293499066) * temp_integral_2_100 + ( -0.018374757752) * min_ir_2_100 

+ ( -0.0176064605374) * ir_diff_100_2 + ( -0.00938111727564) * delta_q_100_10_min + ( -0.115764199563) * 

delta_q_100_10_var + (2.79396979625)) 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.0346581960281725 

Role: pysr 

Formula: (1.5561504  - (delta_q_100_10_var  - (-temp_integral_2_100 + sin(delta_q_100_10_min  -

temp_integral_2_100  - (delta_q_100_10_min  - (-temp_integral_2_100 + ir_diff_100_2  -

sin(ir_diff_100_2*cos(ir_diff_100_2))))))))*0.025488654*(delta_q_100_10_min  - 1*( -1.945337)) +

2.6897624 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.114347693146 

Token usage: 0 

Role: equation author 

Formula: 0.500244570077*exp(0.319825440139*delta_q_100_10_min) + 2.27362903988 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.152638377207 

Role: candidate decider 

Formula: Abs(delta_q_100_10_min*((capacity_fade_slope_2_100 * discharge_capacity_cycle_2)**3*exp( -

3.4*exp( -3.4*Abs((capacity_fade_slope_2_100 *

discharge_capacity_cycle_2)**3))*Abs((capacity_fade_slope_2_100 *

discharge_capacity_cycle_2)**3))*exp( -3.4*Abs((capacity_fade_slope_2_100 *

discharge_capacity_cycle_2)**3))) + ((delta_q_100_10_min*delta_q_100_10_min*(delta_q_100_10_min  -

0.5631909) + (capacity_fade_slope_2_100 * discharge_capacity_cycle_2))*exp( -

3.4*Abs(delta_q_100_10_min*delta_q_100_10_min*(delta_q_100_10_min  - 0.5631909) +

(capacity_fade_slope_2_100 * discharge_capacity_cycle_2))))*1.1395235 +

exp(delta_q_100_10_min)*0.092722535) + 2.6687772 

ACC: 1 

NMSE: 0.235584506435 

Supplementary Note 5.  Detailed prompt templates in LLM -PySR Agent A (Search controller) 

Prompt template: 

Task: You are LLM -A in a  symbolic -regression loop. 

Context: {context or "Unknown physical background. Use variable meanings + data patterns only."} 

Variable meanings: {json.dumps(variable_desc, ensure_ascii=False)} 

Data snapshot (first up to 100 rows): {json.dumps(data_snapshot if isinstance(data_snapshot, dict) else {}, 

ensure_ascii=False)} 

Experience memory: {json.dumps(memory, ensure_ascii=False)} 

Previous round reviews_with_formula: {json.dumps(reviews_with_formula or [], ensure_ascii=False)} 

LLM -C recommended maxdepth (previous round): {llm_c_recommended_maxdepth if 

llm_c_recommended_maxdepth is not None else "null"} 

Allowed base operators: {global_operators} 

Return strict JSON with keys: 

- engineered_features: [{"name":"u1","expression":"...","reason":"...","dimension_check":"pass/unknown"}] 

- selected_input_features: ["x1","x2","u1"] 

- selected_operators: ["+","*","log", "..."] # choose from allowed_base_operators 

- custom_unary_operators: {"f1":"..."} 

- custom_binary_operators: {"f2":"..."} 

- recommended_maxdepth: <int_or_null> 

- decision_evidence: { 

"operators": [{"op":"sin","source":"pattern|memory|context","evidence":"..."}], 

"features": [{"name":"u1","source":"pattern|memory|context","evidence":"..."}] 

}

Rules: 

1) Prefer only high -confidence engineered features. 

2) A custom operator should combine >=2 base operators. 

3) Do not exceed {max_custom_ops} custom operators total. 

4) Only use operators from allowed list in expressions. 

4.1) Custom operator constraints: 

- Unary custom operator must be expression over x only (form f(x)). - Binary custom operator must be expression over x,y only (form f(x,y)). 

- Do not reference dataset variable names (u1, v, E_n, etc.) inside custom operator definitions. 

- Do not call custom operators inside custom operator definitions (no f1(...), f2(...)). 

- Do NOT output assignments like "f1(x)+x" as an operator definition. The definition itself must be only the 

RHS expression. 

- Valid examples: 

unary: "exp( -abs(x))", "sin(x) + x^2" 

binary: "x*log(1+abs(y))", "sin(x) + cos(y)" 

- Invalid examples: 

"f1(x)+x", "f2(u1, x)", "x + z", "f3(x)" 

- If uncertain, output empty custom operators: {}. 

5) selected_input_features are the final variables to pass to PySR. Keep them minimal. 

5.2) selected_input_features must contain at most 5 variables total. 

If uncertain, choose fewer variables instead of adding weak ones. 

5.1) Feature -engineering budget: 

- Hard limit: at most 3 engineered features. 

- Output only the top -3 most important engineered features ranked by expected impact on PySR fit quality. 

- If you are uncertain, output fewer features instead of filling to 3. 

- Start from atomic/low -granularity features first (pairwise distance, ratio, product, square). 

- Avoid directly constructing an almost -complete final law in one step. 

6) Use Experience memory as hard guidance: 

- Prioritize operators marked effective. 

- Consider expanding to suggested operators when current fit is poor. 

- Avoid operators marked ineffective unless there is clear new evidence. 

- Prefer recommended feature -engineering patterns and custom unary/binary operators. 

7) Analyze internal relation patterns directly from the provided first -100 -row data snapshot. 

8) For selected_operators: prefer a stable compact set. 

If memory already supports prior operators, change at most 1 -2 operators this round. 

9) Dimension -check policy: 

- Do NOT output "fail". Use only "pass" or "unknown". 

- If variable meanings do NOT provide explicit physical units, prefer "unknown". 

- For sin/cos/tan/log/exp on normalized or unit -unknown variables, use "pass" or "unknown". 

10) selected_operators must be a concise subset of allowed_base_operators. 11) Prefer operators that are repeatedly supported by data_snapshot and experience_memory. 

11.1) Never add "re"/"im" as operators. They are exporter wrappers and should not increase complexity. 

12) Progressive update policy: 

- Keep high -performing engineered features/operators from prior rounds unless strong contradictory 

evidence appears. 

- Avoid replacing many features/operators at once. 

13) Single -plan policy: 

- Return only one final plan. 

- Do not output conservative_plan or expansion_plan. 

14) Every selected operator/engineered feature should have a traceable evidence source in decision_evidence. 

15) Decide recommended_maxdepth in [6, 40]. Prefer LLM -C recommendation unless strong contrary 

evidence appears. 

Agent B (Candidate reviewer) 

Prompt template: 

Task: You are LLM -B. Analyze and score candidate symbolic formulas. 

Context: {context or "Unknown background"} 

Variable meanings: {json.dumps(variable_desc, ensure_ascii=False)} 

Current best score: {current_best_score} 

Current best metrics: {json.dumps(current_best_metrics, ensure_ascii=False)} 

Candidates: 

{json.dumps(candidates, ensure_ascii=False)} 

Return strict JSON object with this schema (no extra text): 

{

"reviews": [ 

{

"index": <int>, 

"subscores": { 

"interpretability": <float_0_to_1>, 

"acc_quality": <float_0_to_1>, 

"nmse_quality": <float_0_to_1>, 

"pysr_metrics_quality": <float_0_to_1>, "fit_quality": <float_0_to_1>, 

"simplicity": <float_0_to_1>, 

"variable_semantics_consistency": <float_0_to_1> 

}, 

"score": <float_0_to_1>, 

"label": "positive|negative", 

"reason": "<short>" 

}

]

}

Rules: 

1) Score each candidate directly; do not hard -reject whole formulas by a global dimension gate. 

2) Metric meanings: 

- ACC: higher is better (accuracy under tolerance). 

- val_acc: higher is better; treat this as the primary reliability signal for final score. 

- NMSE: lower is better (normalized mean square error). 

- loss (from PySR): lower is better. 

- sr_score (from PySR): higher is better, but only a secondary tie -breaker. 

3) Score based on: 

- physical interpretability, 

- ACC/val_acc value (most important): larger is better, 

- NMSE value: smaller is better, 

- PySR metrics (loss lower; use sr_score only when other metrics are close). 

4) Reason must explicitly mention ACC/NMSE/loss/sr_score and why the score is assigned. 

5) The final positive/negative label is  determined by system -side deterministic gates. 

You still need to return a reasonable label and score, but the system may override label. 

6) In comparison reasoning, prioritize val_acc/ACC first, then NMSE/loss, then interpretability. 

Use sr_score only for tie -breaking when the above metrics are close. 

7) Score direction must follow metric direction: 

- if ACC/val_acc are higher while NMSE and loss are lower, assign a higher score. 

- if ACC/val_acc are lower while NMSE and loss are higher, assign a lower score. 

8) Strict anti -overrating guard (must follow): - Let reliability = val_acc when available, otherwise ACC. 

- If reliability < 0.10, score must be <= 0.45. 

- If 0.10 <= reliability < 0.20, score must be <= 0.55. 

- If 0.20 <= reliability < 0.40, score must be <= 0.65. 

- If 0.40 <= reliability < 0.60, score must be <= 0.75. 

- If 0.60 <= reliability < 0.80, score must be <= 0.85. 

- If 0.80 <= reliability < 0.90, score must be <= 0.92. 

- If reliability >= 0.90, score can be in [0.0, 1.0] according to other metrics. 

9) High -score gate: 

- score > 0.85 is only allowed when BOTH ACC >= 0.60 and val_acc >= 0.60 (or ACC >= 0.60 if val_acc 

missing). 

10) Never give high score to low -quality fit: 

- If reliability < 0.60 and (NMSE is large or loss is large relative to better candidates), 

keep score conservative (typically <= 0.75). 

Agent C (Experience reflector) 

Prompt template: 

Task: You are LLM -C. Produce concise, correctable experience for the next LLM -A round. 

Context: {context or "Unknown physical background"} 

Variable meanings: {json.dumps(variable_desc, ensure_ascii=False)} 

Candidate briefs from this iteration: 

{json.dumps(candidate_briefs or [], ensure_ascii=False)} 

Strong -evidence channel: 

{json.dumps(strong_pos, ensure_ascii=False)} 

Weak -evidence channel: 

{json.dumps(weak_channel, ensure_ascii=False)} 

Return strict JSON: 

{

"memory": [], 

"guidance": { 

"good_feature_combinations": ["..."], 

"bad_feature_combinations": ["..."], "good_operators": ["..."], 

"bad_operators": ["..."], 

"recommended_maxdepth": <int_or_null> 

}

}

Rules: 

1) Keep guidance concise and high precision. Only output these 4 categories. 

2) good_feature_combinations: at most 2 combinations. 

3) Use strong channel as hard evidence; weak channel only as tentative hints. 

4) Experience can be wrong. You must revise previous conclusions if current evidence contradicts them. 

5) If no reliable evidence exists for an item, do not output it. 

5.1) Treat re(expr)/im(expr) as exporter wrappers (real/imag part), not as extra operator complexity. 

5.2) good_operators and bad_operators must be operator names from this exact set only: 

{json.dumps(GLOBAL_BASE_OPERATORS, ensure_ascii=False)}. 

Do NOT output natural -language phrases such as "avoid division_by_xxx". 

5.3) good_feature_combinations and bad_feature_combinations must be expression snippets over known 

variables only. 

Do NOT output plain -language advice in these fields. 

6) If evidence is enough, set guidance.recommended_maxdepth in [6, 40]. 

6) Previous good combo memory (may contain stale ideas): 

{json.dumps(prior_combos, ensure_ascii=False)}